
The CONNOISSEUR, No. 131. NO other disposition or turn of mind so totally unfits a man for all the soffices of life as indolence. An idle man is a mere blank in the creation, he seems made for no end, and lives to no purpose. He cannot engage himself in any employment or profession, because he will never have diligence enough to follow it; he can succeed in no undertaking, for he will never pursue it; he must be a bad husband, father, and relation, for he will not take the least pains to preserve his wife, children, and family from starving; and he must be a worthless friend, for he wouldn’t draw his hand from his bosom, though to prevent the destruction of the universe. If he is born poor, he will remain foe all his life, which will probably end in a ditch or at the gallows; if he embarks in trade he will be a bankrupt; and if he is a person of fortune, his stewards will acquire immense estates, and he himself perhaps will die in the Fleet.
It should be considered that nature did not bring us into the world in a state of perfection, but has left us in a capacity of improvement, which should seem to intimate that we should labour to render ourselves excellent. Very few are such absolute idiots, as not to be able to become at least decent, if not eminent, in their several stations, by unwearied and keen application: nor are there any possessed of such transcendent genius and abilities, as to render all pains and diligence unnecessary. Perseverance will overcome difficulties, which at first appear insuperable; and it is amazing to consider, how great and numerous obstacles may be removed by a continual attention to any particular point. I will not mention here the trite example of Demosthenes, who got over the greatest natural impediment to oratory, but content myself with a more modern and familiar instance. Being at Sadler's Wells a few nights ago, I could not but admire the surprising feats of activity there exhibited, and at the same time reflected what incredible pains and labour it must have cost the performers to arrive at the art of writhing their bodies into such various and unnatural contortions.
But I was most taken with the ingenious artist, who after fixing two bells to each foot, the same number to each hand, with great propriety placing a cap and bells on his head, played several tunes, and went through as regular triple peals and Bob Majors, as the boys at Christ Church hospital; all which he effected by the due jerking of his arms and legs, and nodding his head backward and forward. If this artist had taken equal pains to employ his head in another way, he might perhaps have been as deep a proficient in numbers as Jededia Buxton, (See Vol xxiv.p.251.) or at least a tolerable modern rhimer [rhymer], of which he is now no bad emblem: and if our fine ladies would use equal diligence, they might fashion their minds as successfully as Madam Catherine distorts her body:
There is not in the world a more useless idle animal, than he who contents himself with being merely a gentleman. He has an estate, therefore he will not endeavour to acquire knowledge: he is not to labour in any vocation, therefore he will do nothing. But the misfortune is, that there is no such thing in nature [Page 3 Specimen of Epitaphs of a new Species. 383] as negative virtue, and that absolute idleness is impracticable. He who does no good, will certainly do mischief; and the mind, if it is not stored with useful knowledge, will necessarily become a magazine of nonsense and trifles. Wherefore a gentleman, though he is not obliged to rise to open his shop or work at his trade, may always find some ways of employing his time to advantage. If he makes no advances in wisdom, he will become more and more a slave to folly; and he that does nothing because he has nothing to do, will become vicious and abandoned, or at best, ridiculous and contemptible.
There is not a more melancholy object, than a man of an honest heart and fine natural abilities, whose good qualities are thus destroyed by indolence. Such a person is a constant plague to all his friends and acquaintance, with the means in his power of adding to their happiness; and suffers himself to rank among the lowest characters, when he might render himself conspicuous among the highest. Nobody is more universally beloved, and more universally avoided than my friend Careless. He is a humane man, who never did a beneficent action; and a man of unshaken integrity, on whom it is impossible to depend. With the best head and the best heart he regulates his conduct in the most absurd manner, and frequently injures his friends, for whoever neglects to do justice to himself, must inevitably wrong those with whom he is connected; and it is by no means a true maxim, that an idle man hurts nobody but himself. Virtue then is not to be considered in the light of mere innocence, or abstaining from harm, but as the exertion of our faculties in doing good: as Titus, when he had let a day flip, undistinguished by some act of virtue, cried out, “I have lost a day.” If we regard our time in this light, how many days shall we look back upon as irretrievably lost? and to how narrow a compass would such a method of calculation frequently reduce the longest life? If we were to number our days, according as we have applied them to virtue, it would occasion strange revolutions in the manner of reckoning the ages of men. We should see some few men arrive at a good old age in the prime of their youth, and meet with several young fellows of four-score.
Agreeable to this way of thinking, I remember to have met with the epitaph of an aged man four years old; dating his existence from the time of his reformation from evil courses. The inscriptions on most tomb-stones commemorate no acts of virtue performed by the persons who lie under them, but only record that they were born one day and died another. But I would fain have those people, whole lives have been useless, rendered of some service after their deaths, by affording lessons of instruction and morality to those they leave behind them. Wherefore I could wish, that in every parish several acres were marked out for a new and spacious burying-ground, in which every person, whose remains are there deposited, should have a small stone laid over them, reckoning their age according to the manner in which they have improved or abused the time allotted them in their lives. In such circumstances, the plate on a coffin might be the highest panegyric which the deceased could receive; and a little square stone, inscribed with Ob. Ann. Ætat. 8o. would be a nobler eulogium than all the lapidary adulation of modern epitaphs. In a burying-ground of this nature, allowing for the partiality of survivors, which would certainly point out the most brilliant actions of their dead friends, we might perhaps see some inscriptions not much unlike the following:
Here lie the remains of a celebrated beauty, aged 50, who died in the fifth year of her age. She was born in her 18th year, and was untimely killed by the small-pox in her twenty-third.
Here rests in eternal sleep the mortal part of L. B. a free thinker, aged 88, an infant. - He came into the world by chance in the year - - and was annihilated in the first year of his age.
Here continue to rot the bones of a noted buck, an embryo, who never showed any signs of life, and after 23 years was so totally putrefied, that he could not be kept above ground any longer.
Here lies the swollen carcass of a bon companion, who was born in a dropsy in the 40th year of his age: He lingered in this condition till lie was obliged to be tapped, when he relapsed into his former condition, and died in the 2d year of his age, and the 23d of his drinking
Here lies Isaac Da Costa, a convert from Judaism, aged 64. He was born and christened in his 61st year, and died in the true faith in the 3rd year of his age.
Here is deposited the body of the celebrated Beau Tawdry, who was born at [384 Address to the Asociators for Preserving the Game.] court in the year on a birthnight, and died of grief in his second year, upon the court's going into mourning.
Here rots A. B. Still-born, who died of a fright on the 20th of May 1755.
Here rests from his labour's the brave Gen. B. who died about the hundredth year of his age, older than Methuselah.

