
For JANUARY 1751.
Mr URBAN, inclose an Article, which is inserted (Vol.ii. p. 169;&c.) in the Harleian Miscellany, and has been the occasion of several disputes and reflections. The truth of the whole relation is warmly maintained by some; but divers particulars are asserted to be improbable, if not improbable by others. I think, that there is great room to doubt, and that some further lights may be acquired by proposing it in your Magazine. If you agree with me, be pleased to distinguish the paragraphs with the figure which I have added to the end of each; and to prefix the number of each paper, as I conceive they will hear to be distinguished, annexing the bracket [, which I perceive is your mark for insertions, or observations of an editor. I have sent you the heads of my suspicions, but you need not publish them yet. Perhaps something more satisfactory may be obtained by enquiring of old people in proper places, now the rancour of party is worn off. I suppose the first paragraph to be the title of the MS. and the 4' next to be the editor's instructions, kindly to let the reader know what it contains nii
An Account of the Burial of K. Charles I. and of Oliver Cromwell: In which it appears, how Oliver's Friends contrived to secure his Body from future Disgrace, and to expose the Corpse of King Charles to be substituted in the Punishment and Ignominy designed for the Usurper's Body. MS. (1 Amongst other papers, the following MS.2 was carefully preserved by my Lord Oxford It contains an extract from the journal of the House of Commons; which honourable house, resolving to disgrace the name of the late usurper Oliver Cromwell, as far as try in their power, ordered his body to be taken up, and to be first hanged on the gallows at Tyburn, and then to be burnt. [2]
 This order was pursued by the sergeant of that honourable house so far, as to find a coffin with Oliver's name, and usurped titles, at the east-end of the middle isle of Henry VII's chapel, in Westminster Abbey. [3]
This, with an account where the said inscription is, or was, within a few years ago, to be seen, is written in a very fair hand. [4]
Then, in two different hands, there follows the most remarkable account of a counter interment of the arch-traytor, as well as the reason and contrivance to secure his body from that expected ignominy, and to continue the revenge of K.Charles's enemies, even to the disgrace of substituting the body of the beheaded king, in the punishment intended by a justly enraged people, upon the dead body of the usurper. [5]
[PAPER 1.]
[A] SOON after the restoration, the then sergeant of the House of Commons was ordered, by the house, to go with his officers to St Potter's Westminster,and demand the body of Oliver Cromwell, buried, there, to be taken up, in order to be disposed in the manner the house should adjudge fitting.  [6]
[B] Whereupon the said sergeant went, and, in the middle isle of Henry the Seventh's chapel, at the east end, upon taking up the pavement, in a vault, was found his corpse; in the inside of whose coffin, and upon the breast of the corpse, was laid a copper-plate, finely gilt, inclosed in a thin case of lead, [C] on the one side whereof, were engraved the arms of England, impaled, with the arms of Oliver; and, on the reverse,the following Legend, viz. [7]
Oliverius Protector Reipublicæ Anglicæ, Scotiæ, & Hiberniæ, Natus 25 April.1599, Inauguratus 16 Dec. 1653, Mortuus 3. Sept. Anno 1658, Hic Situs left. [8]
[D] The said sergeant, believing the plate to be gold, took it pretendedly, as his fee; and Mr Giffard, of Colchester, who married the serjeant's daughter, has now the plate, which, his father in-law told him, he came by, in the manner above related: [9]
[E PAPER 11]
A Counter-Interment of the aforesaid Arch-Traytor, as averred, and ready to be deposed (if occasion required) by Mr Barkstead, who daily frequents Richard's Coffee House, within Temple-Bar, being Son [F]to Barkstead, the Regicide, that was executed as such, took after the Restoration, the son being, at the time of the said Arch-Traytor's death, about the age of 15 years: [10]
THAT the said regicide Barkstead being lieutenant of the Tower of London, and a great confident of [G} the usurper, did, among other such confidents, in the time of the usurper's sickness, desire to know where he would be buried: To which, he answered, where he had obtained the greatest victory and glory, and as nigh the spot a could be guessed, where the heat of the action was, viz. in the field at  [H] Nasoby, Co. Northampton; which accordingly was thus performed: At midnight (soon after his death) being first embalmed, and wrapped in a leaden coffin, he was, in a hearse, conveyed to the said field, the said Mr Barkstead, by order of his father, attending close to the hearse; and, being come to the field, there found, about the midst of it, a grave, dug about 9 feet deep, with the green sod carefully laid on one side, and the mould on the other; in which, the coffin being soon put, the grave was instantly filled up, and the green sod laid exactly flat upon it, care being taken, that the surplus mould was clean taken away. [11]
Soon after, like care was taken, that the said field was entirely ploughed up, and lown. 3 or 4 years successively with wheat. [12]
Several other material circumstances, relating to the said interment, the said Mr Barkstead relates (too long to be here inserted) and, particularly, after the restoration, his conference with the late (witty) Duke of Buckingham, &c. [13]
[PAPER III.]
Talking over this account of Barkstead's, with the rev. Mr Sm - of - , whose father had long resided in Florence, as a merchant, and afterwards as minister from King Charles II and had been well acquainted with the fugitives after the restoration; he assured me, he had often heard the said account by other hands: Those miscreants always boasting, that they had wrecked their revenge against the father, as far as human foresight could carry it, by beheading him, whilst living, and making his best friends the executors of the utmost ignominies upon him, when dead. Asking him the particular meaning of the last sentence, he said, that Oliver, and his friends, apprehending the restoration of the Stuart family and that all imaginable disgrace, on that turn, would be put upon his body, as well as memory; he contrived his own burial, as averred by Barkstead, having all the theatrical honours of a pompous funeral paid to an empty coffin; into which, afterwards, was removed the corpse of the martyr (which, by Lord Clarerdon's own account, had never truly, or certainly, been interred; and, after the restoration, when most diligently sought after, by the Earls of Southampton and Lindley, at the command of King Charles II in order to a soleme removal, could nowhere, in the church where he was said to have been buried, be found) that, if any sentence should be pronounced, as upon his body, it might effectually fall upon that of the king. That, on that order of the commons, in King Charles II time, the tomb was broken down, and the body taken out of a coffin so inscribed, as mentioned in the serjeant's report, was from thence conveyed to Tyburn,   [A] and, to the utmost joy and triumph of that crew of miscreants, hung publicly on the gallows, amidst an infinite crowd of spectators, almost infected with the noisomeness of the stench. The secret being only amongst that abandoned few, there was no doubt in the rest of the people, but the        [B] bodies, so exposed,  were the bodies they were said to be; had not some, whose curiosity had brought them nearer to the tree, observed, with horror, the remains of a countenance they little had expected there; and that, on tying the cord, there was a strong seam about the neck, by which the  [C] head had been, as was supposed, immediately after the desolation, fastened again to the body.
This being whispered about, and the numbers that came to the dismal fight hourly increasing, notice was immediately given of the suspicion to the attending officer, who dispatched a messenger to       [D] court, to acquaint them with the rumour, and the ill consequences the spreading or examining into it further, might have. On which the bodies were immediately ordered down, to be buried again, to prevent any infection. Certain is it, they were not burnt, as in prudence, for that pretended [E] reason, might have been expected; as well as in justice, to have shown the utmost detestation for their crimes, and the most lasting mark of infamy they could inflict upon them. This was the account he gave. What truth there is in it, is not so certain. Many circumstances make the surmise not            [F] altogether improbable: As all those enthusiasts, to the last moment of their lives, ever gloried in the truth of it.

