 

ART. I. A Bill for preventing the unlawful Disinterment of Human Bodies, and for regulating Schools of Anatomy. 1829. 

OUR medical readers will probably think that the following statement, on a most important subject, consists of little more than truisms, and that we are taking great pains to enforce what nobody doubts. Our answer is, that we are not writing to them, but to our legislators and to the public; and if they imagine that these are sufficiently impressed with the importance and true bearings of the question which we are about to explain, they know little of the state of feeling and opinion on the subject. They will think, too, that we have treated the subject in a way far too homely; that we depend for success on propositions as to which the public, if they will but reflect, know as much as ourselves; that we ought to have entered into professional details, and made our readers stare by learning and hard words: but here again we differ from them. We are convinced that, in the present case, the most homely arguments are the most home, and that the public will be most likely to be moved by considerations which they have but to open their eyes in order to appreciate, -- which require only to be stated to be acknowledged, -- which, like many other things, have ceased to impress men strongly only by reason of their familiarity. 

It is of little consequence to medical men, but of vital consequence to the public, that the former should be well instructed in their profession, -- as well, at least, as is consistent with the difficulty of the art, the brevity of life, and the ordinary mediocrity of the human mind. To medical men it is important only in as much as it is more gratifying to practise an art with the consciousness of knowledge than with that of ignorance, and pleasanter to assuage pain, restore health, and rescue life, than to witness suffering without the power of relief, and disease which they cannot arrest. But further than this it is of no importance to them at all, not even with a view to lucre; for whether they be well or ill educated, knowing and skilful, or ignorant and incompetent, they are equally sure, as a class, of employment and maintenance. The public cannot tell the difference, and even if that were otherwise, they could not help themselves. A sick man must employ either nobody, or old women and quacks -- or educated medical men with all their imperfections; and, objectionable as the latter often are, such is the timidity of sickness, the anxiety for relief, and the disposition to lean on other minds when our own are too weak to stand alone, that few sufferers will consider this alternative, and not conclude in their favour. 

But, of what importance is it to the public, that those to whom they apply for relief should be so instructed as to be able to afford it. It may be painful to witness suffering which cannot be relieved, and disease which cannot be arrested, but how much worse is it to endure them? The public have no notion of the power of medical men in families where sickness is going on: the monks had less in the plenitude of their influence. An ignorant man to whom a family have given possession of their confidence (a mistake which people, with all their sagacity, are continually committing) may not only fail to do good, and inflict irreparable mischief, but may occasion a quantity of unnecessary alarm, trouble, expense, and sacrifice, which amount to as great an evil as sickness itself: If he pronounces some hidden part to be diseased, which requires a long, troublesome, and expensive mode of treatment, who is to gainsay him? The patient scarcely knows that he has such a part, or where it is placed, much less its healthy or diseased condition. The doctor only possesses the means of reconnoitring its state: whatever he reports, however false, is believed; and whatever he directs, must be done. He may tell his patient that his liver is too large, that his brain is soft (ramollissement de cerveau: in pathology this does not mean foolishness); or that disease has fixed on some organ, of which he never heard before, as his mucous membranes,'--and it is wonderful how the news will affect him. Give a disease he local habitation and a name,' and though it may be neither visible nor tangible, nor perceptible by any of his senses, it will fasten on his imagination, influence his feelings, and make him as docile as a lamb: the doctor may do anything with him. Of what importance is it that persons possessed of so much power should have the knowledge necessary to use it properly! To relate all the blunders we have seen committed by ill-informed practitioners of medicine and surgery, lives lost, health ruined, limbs sacrificed, trifles mistaken for dangerous cases, and dangerous cases mistaken for trifles, measures, employed which required the greatest sacrifices, and which turned out to be unnecessary and injurious -- to relate all these would require a thousand and one nights, and days beside. 

Those who are behind the scenes, who have sense enough to perceive the truth, and candour enough to confess it, will acknowledge that this statement is not overcharged. Not that medical men are more wrong-headed than others, for the same abundance of mistakes are committed in all the practical pursuits of life. Our servants, our tradesmen, our builders, our lawyers, are constantly committing blunders. One-third of the affairs of life are done wrong. The errors of medicine are only the ordinary errors of the human mind exemplified on a subject of extraordinary importance. 

In England, nine-tenths of the medical men practise both medicine and surgery; that is an undeniable fact; and it is equally certain, that to make a decent surgeon, requires not only anatomical instruction, but also the practice of dissection. It is as impossible to make a surgeon by showing him the dissected body, and expounding to him the various parts of which it consists, as it is to make a painter by showing him pictures, or a carpenter, by taking him into a workshop to see the men bore, nail, plane, and saw. The painter must acquire dexterity in the use of his brush; the carpenter must handle his chisel, his adze, his plane, and his saw; and the surgeon must not only see the parts dissected, but he himself must dissect them again and again, and rehearse those operations on the dead body, which he will have to perform on the living body in the sick chamber, the cockpit, the field of battle, or the hospital. 

The medical and surgical students who come annually to London for this kind of education, are in number about eight hundred or one thousand. To instruct them in the knowledge of anatomy and the art of dissection, the only legal means are the bodies of executed murderers, - which scarcely amount to twelve annually throughout England. In London, a year sometimes passes without the anatomical schools receiving a single body from this source, and they have rarely received more than one in a year. These are the only means which the feelings of the public, and the laws of the land, afford for the anatomical education of a thousand students; and medical men have been driven to this alternative either to abandon the practice of dissection altogether, and allow surgery to relapse into its state a thousand years ago, or to procure bodies by illegal and repulsive means. 

It is well for the public that they have preferred the latter; but the methods adopted are of the most abominable kind. Ruffians called Resurrection-men (the blasphemy of the name is forgotten in its familiarity) gain a precarious and dangerous livelihood by breaking open graves, robbing them of their recent inhabitants, and selling the produce of their depredations to the teachers of anatomy. To what an extent such pursuits may brutalise those employed in them, we have lately had appalling instances in Burke and Hare. Whenever they are detected, they are the objects of legal punishment and popular fury. No wonder ??? but, however natural these feelings may be, and however reasonable these laws, the study of anatomy is thereby prohibited. 

The following curious particulars were communicated before the Anatomical Committee by three resurrection-men. Who can help smiling at the way in which these wretches estimate their calling? It seems that they do not consider themselves as thieves; and the thieves proper are ambitious to be called resurrection-men:

First Resurrection-Man. -- "Every ground in London is watched by men put into them at dark, who stop till day-light, with fire-arms. .... You are subject to be shot; and if you are taken, the parish prosecutes you, and you may get six or twelve months imprisonment. A man may make a good living at it (stealing bodies) if he is a sober man, and acts with judgment. There is a great many of them that profess to get subjects that I suppose do not get four subjects in a twelvemonth; a great many of them that has lately got into the business, and have almost been the ruin of it. The greatest part of the men that have lately got into the business, they are nothing but petty common thieves. Being out late at night, if they are met by the police, they can say they are out getting subjects for the surgeons. They have usually a horse and cart. I should suppose there are at present in London between forty or fifty men that have the name of raising subjects, and that there is but two more, besides myself, that get their living by it. If you are friends with a grave-digger, the thing will be all right to know what bodies to get --if you are not, you cannot get them. The bodies I have got was twenty-three in four nights. It was only one year, I got one hundred. Perhaps the next year I did not get above fifty or sixty. They would not mind shooting a man as dead as a robber if they caught him in a churchyard. If you were pointed out that you are a resurrection-man, they are prejudiced against you." [An odd taste!] ??? Once, I suppose I was not above two yards from the man that shot at me. It was a little bit of ground behind a chapel. They laid by in the chapel for me and another man. We were after two subjects. When I go to work, I like to get those of poor people buried from the workhouses, because, instead of working for one subject, you may get three or four. I do not think, during the time I have been in the habit of working for the schools, I got half a dozen of wealthier people.??? 
"Of the other men who are employed in raising bodies, how many are there you would consent to go out with?" 
[First Resurrection-Man] "Not above two or three." 
"Why would you not go out with the others?" 
"Because they are all thieves, and they never supplied the schools in their lives: they get a subject or two, and call themselves resurrection-men.??? [What odd forms the last weakness of a noble mind may take!] 

Second Resurrection-Man, formerly the captain of the only band in London, now retired from practice. -- "The course I should take would be to have the workhouse subjects: we can get them out of the burial-ground without any difficulty whatever. I am satisfied that there are three or four workhouses that would supply every subject that would be wanting. That was the point I laid down before an honourable member who consulted me, but he would not consent to it. I believe the custom of claiming bodies as those of relatives is constantly done. I never did so myself. I did attempt it once myself, but was detected. It was at St. John's; and we should have obtained the body, but a committee was sitting that evening of the parish, which was sitting at the workhouse where the body lied to be owned. The constable happened to come into the workhouse at the time, and he knew me, and that prevented it, or else we should have certainly had the body. I left off in 1820: to be sure I did go out at different times afterwards, but then we had our men shot away from us, and it was very dangerous. On one occasion one man was shot in four places, and we took him away with us: to be sure I had never gone out with him before, and he was an incautious hand. 
Third Resurrection-Man.--"We could not obtain the rich so easily because they were buried so deep." 
"If the law were altered in the manner alluded to, would you continue the practice of exhumation?" 
[Third Resurrection-Man] ???No, I would never open a grave."--See Evidence of A. B., and C. D., and F. G., before the Select Committee of Anatomy. 
But this mode of procuring bodies led to an evil which few perhaps had anticipated; the increasing demand for them, from the increasing number of students, and the increasing sense of the necessity for anatomical knowledge, together with the dangers to which resurrection-men were exposed, raised the price of bodies from two guineas to ten, or sometimes even to sixteen, so that the price became a temptation to murder. Sir Astley Cooper, on being asked what he thought of resurrection-men, answered, 'There is no crime they would not commit; if they imagined that I should make a good subject they would not have the smallest scruple, if they could do the thing undiscovered, to make a subject of me.' -- Sir Henry Halford said, When there is a difficulty in obtaining bodies, and their value is so great, you absolutely throw a temptation in the way of these men to commit murder for the purpose of selling the bodies of their victims'. Sir Henry's prophetic opinion was given in May, 1828, and a few months afterwards the public were appalled by the discovery of the anatomical murders at Edinburgh. But although these are the only instances that have been detected, there can be little doubt that similar deeds had been done before, and are perpetrated still. An eminent surgeon tells us, that when he was young in practice, and had leisure to keep up his anatomical knowledge by dissection, he had a dissecting-room in his own house, and that bodies were sometimes brought to him under very mysterious circumstances. One evening a body was brought into his dissecting-room; it was that of a young woman who appeared to have died in perfect health, and our friend could not help saying to himself, 'She looks as if she had never been buried.' The man who brought her said that he could procure him bodies of any kind, male or female, of any age, fat or thin, to order. The suspicion of murder never crossed his mind until he read the trials of Burke and Hare. This is rather an old story; but another surgeon, of high anatomical reputation, with whom we conversed on these matters very lately, assures us that he has had no doubt, during several years past, as to the frequent perpetration of murder, for resurrection-men purposes, in this city. He informs us, that students are of late much in the habit of purchasing, for private dissection, not a whole body at a time -- but a limb, or a part of a limb -- so that it is obvious a human butcher may realise abundant wages of blood without exhibiting to his customers the slightest means of discovering under what circumstances the machine, of which a fragment only is before each of them, ceased to move. At the time when this article meets the public eye, the price of bodies in the London dissecting-rooms is from thirteen to sixteen guineas! 

But these means are not only illegal, repulsive to good dispositions, and brutalising to bad ones, --they are likewise insufficient. The number of bodies procured annually for the anatomical schools of London is between three and four hundred: that is, considerably less, upon the lowest calculation of students, than one body to two pupils, a provision clearly insufficient to make them all what they ought to be --expert dissectors. This would require two bodies to one pupil, that is, nearly two thousand annually. The result of this deficiency is, that it is impossible for the great body of the students to procure a good anatomical education in England. Many go abroad for this purpose, especially to Paris and Germany; but the greater number, wanting both time and money, settle in practice with a very deficient knowledge of this fundamental branch of their profession. Many, in fact, do not dissect at all; although the annual number of students in London is estimated at eight hundred or one thousand, the annual number of dissecting pupils is only five hundred. 

On whom does the evil fall? -- as we have already shown, on the public: for these young men, who, under the denomination of students, seem to be of no importance but to themselves and to their relatives, are by and by distributed throughout the kingdom, and, pitching their tents in its different cities, towns, and villages, in a few years, their elders clearing away, the whole medical and surgical care of the public comes into their hands, -- every vein that is opened -- every wound that is dressed -- every fracture or dislocation that is set, or attempted to be set -- every limb that is amputated --every hernia which is operated upon, -- is done by them; -- that is, by hands which have never acquired the requisite dexterity, because the laws of the land, and the feelings of the public, forbid it. It has been said in Parliament! that the evil falls chiefly on the poor, as the rich can always procure the best advice; but this, which would be no consolation for us if it were true, is a gross mistake. It is evident that the rich who have houses in London can, whilst in London, procure the attendance of eminent hospital surgeons, who, from the length and peculiar advantages of their education, were practical anatomists before they became practical surgeons. It is also true that men quite equal to these in anatomical knowledge and surgical skill are occasionally found in our provincial cities; but these are rare exceptions to the general rule; for the greater number of those who attend, not only the poor, but the rich, throughout the island, are the persons who have suffered most severely from the impediments to their anatomical education. They settle and they thrive -- many of them as amply as if they had the most perfect knowledge of their profession; by dint of natural ability, good manners, and great industry, they push themselves into very lucrative employment: but this meritorious body of men feel the defects of their anatomical education throughout life. The rich, moreover, who have houses in London, are not always there -- they spend half the year in the country; and if, during their residence at their seats, they are attacked by illness which requires surgical treatment, they must depend for health, and perhaps for life, on the provincial practitioners. The following case must still be in the recollection of many of our readers: -- A distinguished nobleman, playing at cricket at his country-seat, was seized with strangulated hernia. It could not be reduced; and the surgeons of the neighbourhood were either unwilling or not permitted to operate. An express was sent to London, and a skilful hand --we believe the late Sir James Earl -- went down; but when he arrived it was too late. The bowel was liberated by an operation; but it had been strangulated so long as to occasion mortification, and the noble patient died. If our readers imagine that this is a rare instance, we can only smile at their unsuspicious ignorance. We could fill a volume with instances, but we shall give only one more: it was more fortunate in its result, and rather farcical in its progress; yet it serves to show how useless and mischievous an animal is a surgeon without a knowledge of anatomy. It used to be related by Mr. Abernethy, in his lectures. 

Considering,' said he, the way in which the lower jaw is fixed, there is but one direction in which it can be dislocated. When the condyles are upon the eminenti?? articulares, it is possible they may burst the capsules, and slip over them; and this is the only dislocation that can take place in the jaw. How is it to be reduced? Put your fingers into the mouth, so as to make a lever of the dislocated bone; then, if you press the chin up, you depress the condyles, and the joint slips in. If you attempt to close the mouth, the condyles still lodging where they were, you never will reduce it. There was a major in the army, who had the misfortune of frequently dislocating his jaw; and it was an infirmity he cared very little about, for he was generally moving about with his regiment, and when he put it out, the regimental surgeon put it in again. But it happened that on one occasion he was fourteen or fifteen miles from where the regiment was quartered, dining with a gentleman, and being rather merry after dinner, laughing heartily, the jaw slipped out. His mouth, of course, remained wide open, and it was impossible to close it while the condyles remained out of their sockets. His mouth remained open; and no one can articulate with the mouth in that situation; but he made an inarticulate noise, and the host, being very much surprised, considered that there was something wrong with him, and sent for a medical man, residing in the neighbourhood, whom, if you please, we will for the present call the apothecary. He said, when he saw the major, that there certainly was something wrong with him. -- that there was something wrong with the jaw, -- and that, in fact, it was dislocated; and he began to pull the jaw, for the purpose of putting it into its proper place. Now, that would take it just farther from its proper socket. The officer, knowing the simplicity of the case, and how it ought to be done, was so enraged that a man should be so presumptuous as to put up a pestle and mortar above his door, and yet not know how to put in a dislocated jaw, that he vented his rage in a most furious manner, but in a very inarticulate way; and the apothecary took it into his head that the man was mad; and, faith, it was very near verified; for Mr. Pestle's suggestion put the major into a terrible rage, which actually confirmed the apothecary's opinion. He therefore threw him down, put a straight waistcoat on him, left him lying on his back, and then sent him some cooling draughts, and some lotion for the jaw, and a blister for his head. The major then found that there was nothing for him but submission; and after some time had elapsed, he made signs for pen, ink, and paper; and as these were not instruments which it was supposed he could very much injure himself with, they were furnished to him, and when he got them he wrote on the paper just these words: - "For God Almighty's sake, send with all possible speed to Mr. So-and-so, surgeon of the regiment." That was considered a very reasonable request; and therefore they sent off a man on horseback for the surgeon immediately, The surgeon came, took off the blister, and immediately set the dislocation.' 

We shall be told that the errors of medical men are not all occasioned by ignorance of anatomy, but that many of them spring from want of information in other branches of the profession, from haste, or from natural defect of judgment. This is true; but this acknowledgment leaves still a prodigious number of errors behind, essentially dependent on want of anatomical knowledge. In all those cases which are relieved by manual assistance, a familiar knowledge of the anatomy of the part and manual dexterity are essentially necessary. There is also a crowd of purely medical cases in which, judgment and knowledge of other subjects being the same, the best anatomist is the best physician. This was one of the two reasons why the late Dr. Bailey was considered the first physician of his time; the other was, that he had the clearest head. 

Thus far,-- to return to our immediate subject,--there is nothing of injustice in the laws. A nation has a perfect right to say, we will forego the advantages of this knowledge, rather than purchase them at such a price: we will consent to have our diseases mistaken, and our accidents mismanaged, rather than consent to leave the dead dissected. But the unaccountable part of the case is now to be stated. As our laws prohibit the study of anatomy, (it would be a quibble to say that they do not, whilst they prohibit that which is necessary for it,) the least that could be expected is, that the unskilfulness of medical men, the inevitable effect of this prohibition should pass unpunished. But what is the fact? If an ignorant and awkward surgeon (ignorant and awkward, not from his own fault, but because the laws forbid him to know better) happens to maltreat the limbs and bodies of his Majesty's subjects, he is liable to be prosecuted; and as the jury sympathize not with the surgeon but with the patient, they generally give heavy damages. Every year produces some flagrant and infamous examples of this tyranny. Thus our laws prohibit a man from studying anatomy, and punish him for being ignorant of it. 

For a state of things so injurious to the public, and so unjust to medical men, there is only one effectual remedy. Dissection is no evil to the dead, for the body is insensible to the knife; and, the soul, even if conscious of what is going on in this nether world, must look on the process at least with indifference -- we can hardly doubt with approbation. It is an evil only to the surviving friends, whose affections still cling to the remains of the departed object of their love, and whose feelings are wounded by any violence offered to them. If, therefore, we could procure bodies with no friends to feel pain at their dissection, to what better purpose could they be turned than that of yielding a kind of knowledge procurable by no other means, and essentially necessary to the relief and cure of diseases? Such a supply is to be found only in the unclaimed bodies of large cities. The wisdom of funeral laws,' says Sir Thomas Browne, reduced undoing fires into the rule of sober obsequies, wherein few could be so mean as not to provide wood, pitch, a mourner, and an urn.' Yet this small proportion amounts to a large number in the crowded population of an immense metropolis. In hospitals, prisons, and poor-houses, persons are continually dying leaving behind them no friends to claim the body, to feel comfort at its being buried, or pain at its being dissected. 

'It appears from the returns obtained by the committee in 1827 from the parishes situate in London, Westminster, and Southwark, or their immediate vicinity, that out of 3744 persons who died in the workhouses of these parishes in the year 1827, 3103 were buried at the parish expense; and that of these, about 1108 were not attended to their graves by any relations. Report of Select Committee of Anatomy, 1828. 

Besides these, there are the unclaimed bodies from hospitals, prisons, and elsewhere. If all these were given up to the anatomical schools, they would afford an ample, regular, and cheap supply. This plan, which has been long pursued at Paris, has made that city the greatest school of anatomy in the world; and the most eminent surgeons in London, who are, or have been, employed in teaching anatomy, and who are the only competent judges of the evil and its remedy, agree in recommending this plan to be adopted and legalised in England. It was recommended to parliament by the select committee on anatomy, formed the principal object of Mr. Warburton's bill, and was thus sanctioned by the high authority of Mr. Abernethy, when examined before the committee: -- 'I have this feeling,' said he, 'that so strong is the necessity -- that so correspondent with the principles of justice is it, that those who have been sustained in illness and infirmity at the public charge, and who consequently die in debt to the public, should have their bodies converted to the public good that I myself should not hesitate, if I were a member of the Honourable House, to move for leave to bring in a bill to legalize such a proceeding.' 

There is only one objection to this plan which deserves a serious thought. It has been said, that the apprehension of being dissected might have an injurious influence on those who are conscious, that, if they die, they have no friends to protect their remains. We will not deny the force of this objection; but there is a conclusive answer to it, and an effectual remedy for it. Let every person have the power of forbidding the dissection of his body, by leaving a written expression of his wishes to the contrary, and let this be compulsory on those who have the custody of it. This would effectually prevent the apprehended evil; but effectual as it would be, we prophesy that it would not be employed by one out of twenty of the sick inhabitants of hospitals, prisons, and poor-houses. They expect to recover, not to die: they think too little of death and its probabilities; and those who would resort to this means of protecting themselves are those who are least likely to die -- the hypochondriacs, and sufferers from nervous diseases -- a class of inmates far more subject to the fear of death than to its reality. If, however, all those who had no friends to protect their bodies should protect themselves by this means, it would render unclaimed bodies unavailable -- but anatomy would be no worse off than it is. 

Another objection to the use of unclaimed bodies is, that it is unworthy of a free nation, whose laws are made equally for high and low, that the poor and friendless should be dissected, while those who leave kindred and property are consigned to a quiet grave. This view of the subject may produce some effect on the mind, but it will not bear examination. It is a sentimental sophism -- an extension of that compassion which is properly directed to the living and sentient man to his lifeless and insensible remains -- his skin, muscles, blood vessels, and bones. The instant the dead body is considered, as it ought to be, as a mere assemblage of insensible fibres, the sophism must vanish, together with its influence. The poor and friendless man is not more poor and friendless in the grave than he who, during life, was surrounded by relatives, clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day.' Death levels all distinctions: the dead pauper and the dead prince are on a par -- a poor and friendless corpse is as much a figure of speech as a wealthy and befriended one. Besides, the dead may be divided into two classes: those who have relatives, and those who have none. If the former are not to be dissected because they have friends, and the latter because they have none, it is clear that nobody will be dissected at all, and anatomy will become an extinct science. What a strange people we are! We shrink at the thought of consigning the poor and friendless dead to the knife of the anatomist, yet think nothing of sending out young surgeons, whose education we have done all in our power to spoil, to bind up the bleeding wounds, and amputate the shattered limbs, of our brave defenders. 

It has been said that this is a subject on which it is best not to legislate, -- one which will not bear public discussion, -- and that it would be better to leave people to gain their knowledge of anatomy by stealth, and in the dark. In this opinion there may be some worldly sagacity; but if it is seriously and permanently to influence our legislators, and nothing is to be done for our students, -- if they are to be left to keep up the breed of resurrection-men, and rifle graves, -- or to neglect dissection, and become ignorant anatomists and awkward surgeons, -- we beseech our rulers, in the name of common sense and justice, to abolish the penal laws now in force against medical men. Either cease to punish them for disturbing the dead, or cease to punish them for maltreating the living. If you dislocate a joint, and cannot get it set, or break a limb, and find on your recovery that you have a shortened thigh, or a bandy leg, -- if your bladder bursts because your surgeon cannot pass the catheter, or your strangulated hernia mortifies because he cannot release it by an operation, do not complain; it is not his fault, but yours; -- at any rate, do not prosecute him: the law which prohibits him from studying anatomy ought not to punish him for the consequences of being ignorant of it. 

What occasioned the Lords to reject Mr. Warburton's bill, after it had passed the House of Commons, we have not heard, and could not understand from the debate. It had several faults. The University of Edinburgh protested against it on the ground that it would give the London Medical Schools such an advantage over those of Scotland, where the number of unclaimed bodies is very small, (in Edinburgh not a hundred in the course of a year,) that they would be deserted by students, unless a clause was introduced, permitting the transfer of bodies from one part of the empire to another --- from London, for example, where unclaimed bodies are numerous ??? and Dublin, where they are still more so -- to Edinburgh and Glasgow, where there is a great scarcity. This is very reasonable, and ought to be attended to by the framers of any future bill. But the great objection to Mr. Warburton's was this: it compelled anatomists to bury the body which they had dissected, under a penalty of fifty pounds. This clause was absurd and injurious. Do Mr Warburton, and the Anatomical Committee who framed the bill, and the House of Commons who praised and passed it,--do they know what dissection is? The mere examination of a body to discover the cause of death consists in opening, and then closing it, leaving it so free from disfigurement; that the most heart-stricken mother, if she knew what it was, would not object to an inquiry so useful to humanity. But what a different process is dissection! Dissectors are as thorough workmen as putrefaction and the worms. To trace the fragments of a dissected body would be something like tracing the atoms of a buried one:-
To what base uses we may return, Horatio!' 
Those who believe in the resurrection, at the day of judgment, of the identical body, which died perhaps centuries before, have been puzzled to explain how the different atoms of which it was composed, which time has converted into worms and mould, and these again into other things, should be collected and cemented into that body which the last trump is to awake. But it would be almost as difficult to collect the fragments of a dissected body for burial; the utmost care could not prevent parts of different bodies being buried as one person; and a list of the fragments jumbled into one coffin would be as curious as the composition of the witches cauldron in Macbeth, 
'Liver of blaspheming Jew; 
Nose of Turk, and Tartar's lips; 
Finger of birth-strangled babe, 
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab.' 

If Mr. Warburton mean only that the fragments which remain after the anatomist has done all he wishes to do with the body should be collected and buried, there could be no objection to that; but as the clause now stands, the anatomist is exposed to a penalty of fifty pounds, unless the whole or principal part of the body is buried. Such a provision would effectually prohibit the making of preparations, that is, preserved specimens of dissected parts, one of the most important methods of anatomical instruction; and if it had been in force in times past, no anatomical museums could have been formed such as those of the Hunters, at Glasgow, and at the College of Surgeons, which are to anatomists what the Louvre is to painters. In dissection, several students are employed on one body; and those who are industrious and provident preserve the part which they have dissected, to refresh their memory in after-life, when opportunities of dissection are no longer accessible. Every surgeon should have a skeleton, that is, the whole bony structure of one body; a blood-vessel subject, which requires the bones, blood-vessels, and muscles of another; and lastly, considerable parts, as an upper or lower limb, injected and dissected with unusual minuteness. As it is calculated that each student must dissect three bodies, it is therefore clear, that the greater part of these bodies must be preserved unburied. These preserved specimens, injected with coloured wax, to show the course of the blood-vessels, dissected with the greatest care and neatness, and varnished so as to preserve them drier and sweeter than a mummy, are of incalculable value to the young surgeon when he is settled in practice, is required to perform a new or difficult operation, and is at a distance from any hand more skilful than his own. We well remember a young friend being required to perform the operation for strangulated hernia, for the first time in his life. This is a piece of hazardous navigation to the surgeon; his knife is so liable to strike, not on rocks, but on blood-vessels. Our acquaintance had never performed it before, but he had seen it performed, possessed an accurate description of the operation, and, above all, he had a preserved specimen of the course of the blood vessels in the groin, which he had injected, dissected, and varnished, and which he preserved with some little feeling of vanity, as a record of his skill, and an aid to his memory; it was to him on this anxious occasion what the compass is to a mariner on a dark night. He was called to his patient late in the evening; and whilst waiting the result of the milder means of relief, as tobacco injections, warm baths, ice applied to the tumour, and gentle pressure, he sat up all night reading the description of the operation, and examining again and again the ligament which he had to cut, and the blood vessels he had to avoid. At daybreak, the hernia continuing strangulated, he called up two of his surgical friends, and with an anxious heart, but a calm mind and steady hand, he performed the operation; it was successful, and the patient recovered. If anatomists had been compelled to bury the body after dissection, our young friend would have been without a guide; the limb which he had preserved with so much care would, it is true, have been buried with funeral rites, but the same rites would have been read forthwith over the body of this patient. 

When Mr. Abernethy delivered his Hunterian Oration at the College of Surgeons, he noticed an objection which is sometimes uttered by most respectable individuals, that the deaths of dissected persons would be unhallowed by any religious ceremony. It would have been a difficult topic in any other hands than those of this great lecturer, but he answered the scruple by remarking, that the burial service might be read over them before dissection, substituting for the passage -- 'we therefore commit his body to the ground,' some expression appropriate to its peculiar destination (as is the custom on the continent) signifying -- that a knowledge of the internal form of the human body is necessary for the cure of diseases, and useful for religious instruction, as disclosing the most wonderful examples of divine wisdom and power; -- that as this knowledge can be gained only by dissection --and as, in the present case, dissection can give pain neither to the body, for it is senseless, nor to relations, for there are none to grieve over it; for these reasons, that is consigned to the inquiries of the learned, which would otherwise have been the food of worms. 

HE person dying (in a Paris hospital) is attended by the pastor or priest; after death, certain religious ceremonies are performed by the priest connected with the hospital and after that the body remains, until the expiration of twenty-four hours, in the hospital. There is a dead room, into which they are removed from the chapel or altar. At the expiration of twenty-four hours, if the friends do not claim the body, it is then enveloped in clothing, and conveyed in a covered cart to one or other of the great dissection establishments. The rule is, that the covered cart only pass at night; but occasionally the bodies were brought during the day-time.' (Mr. J. R. Bonnet's Evidence.) 

'At Parma and Bologna there is a deposit in which all the poor people who die are put before they are carried out to the burial field. There is in every parish church in Italy a chamber in which all the dead bodies of the poor people are deposited during the day-time, after the religious ceremonies have been performed over them in the church; and in the night they are removed to the dissecting-room, or the burial fields, out of the town,' (Dr. Gaetano Negri's Evidence) 

If religious rites were read over the body about to be dissected, and the bodies of murderers, instead of being dissected, were treated like those of suicides, it would tend more than anything to break that unfortunate association which has been produced by condemning the bodies of murderers only to be anatomised. It is the unanimous opinion of medical men, that nothing contributes so much to keep up the popular antipathy to dissection as this last practice, and that nothing would assist so much to remove this antipathy as the abolition of it. Several of those who have spoken in parliament on the subject have, however, declared that they will never consent to its abolition. We are sorry for this; but though our legislators have the power, of course, of maintaining this law, we apprehend they have no power to compel medical men to execute it, and we venture to suggest to all those who value their characters as gentlemen, and members of a scientific and honourable profession, that it rests with themselves to decline a task which requires them to become post mortem executioners, and actually places them out a level with the hangman. Let Jack Ketch finish the business which he has begun, and take to himself the office of anatomical executioner. 

We have aimed at convincing our legislators that it is of vital importance to the nation that the study of anatomy should not only be tolerated, but encouraged; and that there is only one remedy for the existing evil -- the use of unclaimed bodies. As to the particular provisions of the future bill, (for surely a bill there must be,) we have said nothing: but we cannot look at parts of Mr. Warburton's --without being reminded what an useful addition to the House of Commons would be two or three eminent physicians and surgeons, possessed of knowledge, clear heads, and sufficiently accustomed to speak; to stand up in their place, and correct at once those egregious errors which are at present so sure to be uttered by members whenever medical subjects are introduced, without the House having the smallest suspicion of their absurdity: and which would then be strangled in their first form of speech or remark, and not live to crawl into the provisions of a bill, where they are often mischievous enough to counteract the good it might otherwise have done. In the meantime, to the framers of the bill, aided by competent advisers, we leave the details of its provisions, begging them to carry this at least in their minds that there are only three plans from which to select: one, to prohibit the study of anatomy altogether, and cause surgery to relapse into the infancy of the art; another, to support the breed of resurrection-men, plunder graves, and, after all, supply the nation with half-informed anatomists and unskilful surgeons; the last is, to give up unclaimed bodies to the schools of anatomy, by which resurrection-men would be abolished, the buried lie quietly in their graves, and the nation be supplied with an ample stock of expert anatomists and dexterous surgeons. The legislature and the nation must take their choice; and, should they unfortunately select one of the two former, they cannot in reason complain of, and ought not in justice to punish, that professional ignorance which is the inevitable consequence of either of those measures.
