Enquiries concerning the Tomb of King Alfred, at Hyde Abbey, near Winchester. 
Dear Sir, Horsham Barracks, Feb. 26, 1798. 
THE high veneration I feel for the character and principles of our renowned Alfred, led me, whilst we were quartered in Winchester last year, to make the discovery of his tomb an object of research. 
History informs us, that Alfred and his queen Alfwitha were buried in the church of Newminster, which he founded and began, and which after his death was finished by Edward the elder, who was also interred near his father. In the reign of Henry the first Newminster was taken down on account of its being too near the cathedral church; and in the year 1112 that king, attended by the bishop of Winchester and his whole court, translated with great pomp the body of Alfred to a tomb at the foot of the high altar of the magnificent abbey church which he built for that purpose at a place called Hyde, near the walls of the city of Winchester; the body of Edward the elder, and I believe also of the queen, were removed at the same time. 
You will lament, with me, the failure of my researches, and feel some share of the same indignation, when I inform you that the ashes of the great Alfred, after having been scattered about by the rude hands of convicts, are now probably covered by a building erected for their confinement and punishment. And when you are told that this occurred so late as the year 1788, and that no one in the neighbourhood, led either by curiosity or veneration for his remains, attempted to discover or rescue them from this ignoble fate, your surprise will not, I think, be less than my own. 
To the account I send you (in the hope, that some one more conversant in antiquity, may make this a subject of further inquiry or illustration) I have added a rough drawing, (Pl. XXIII) to which I shall make references, but must forewarn you not to expect great accuracy, as the plan and measurements are taken solely by stepping the ground in different directions, and without instruments or chain. 
The foundations of Hyde Abbey church, for I am informed that little else remained of the structure, were situated in the enclosure A, which is raised two feet above the level of the valley. In the year 1787-8, this small field was purchased by the county, and in it they erected the New Gaol or Bridewell. 
Mr. Page, the keeper of the Bridewell, who is a very intelligent, and apparently accurate man, and of much respectability in his line of life, was the overseer of the prisoners and other workmen there employed, during the whole time of the building of this gaol, the removing the stones and rubbish, and preparing the garden. He very obligingly attended me two mornings; and from his repeated and uniform description, and the points he showed me, I give you the following measurements and account. 
He stated that the inside of the church, which stood on springy ground, was easily distinguished by its being laid with strong beaten clay to the depth of nearly four feet, the whole forming an oblong square, enclosed by the foundations and rubbish. 
At the east-end of the present building the point a appeared to him nearly the centre of the clay taken from north to south, of which there was about fourteen yards on each side, viz. from a to m and m. 
From a eastward to b he supposed twenty-four yards, and from thence the rubbish and foundations extended some yards farther. About d and d, there were two paths of clay nearly six feet wide, one ending to the north in a spot in which the clay was laid in a squarish shape, as in s, and about which there were also ruins of foundations. This, I conceive, may have been the sacristy; the other path to the south, at the termination of which much rubbish is to be seen (c), probably led to the cloisters and apartments of the monks, which in all monasteries were, I believe, uniformly to the south of the church. 
About a was also found a stone coffin cased with lead both within and without, and containing some bones and remains of garments. The lead in its decayed state sold for two guineas; the bones were thrown about, and the stone coffin broken into pieces. There were two other coffins, and no more, found in this part, which were also for the sake of the garden, in which they lay, broken and buried as low as the spring. At h there were remains of a solid basis of masonry, and fragments of several small columns of Purbeck marble. Part of one of these I have obtained. It is ornamented in a spiral direction, with two animals coupled together on one side, and rudely carved flowers on the other. (See Pl. XXII. D) May not this have been part of the high altar, or of the tomb of Alfred near it? Possibly the two other coffins contained the remains of Edward and of queen Alfwitha. 
Farther west, as in gg, many stone coffins were found, and the clay extended to o o, which is about three yards from the door of the centre building of the gaol; the situation and number of coffins denote this to have been the nave of the church. On the whole, the dimensions, as given me by Mr. Page, coincide with those left us by Leland in his account of this abbey. Further east than b were great numbers of stone coffins, and some rather more south, just beyond; but in this part there was no clay; and being beyond the traces of the foundations, we may conclude that it was the church-yard. B appears to have been the monks enclosure, and vestiges of buildings are to be discerned in the parts marked rrr. The gateway of the abbey building p, is the most perfect part remaining of this once flourishing monastery, whose abbot sat in parliament [In Pl. XXII. C is an enclosure filled with remains of the abbey buildings, and is supposed to have been the abbot's part of the monastery. There is scarcely a house in Hyde Street which does not shew some remains of the abbey. E. Site of the abbey mill. F. the mill dam. G. the site of St. Bartholomew's church. H. remains of fishponds. PP. Abbey buildings.]. Two heads over this gateway, supposed to represent Alfred and Edward the elder, have been copied by Mr. Carter, but they are much defaced. In the wall at q there are other heads and sculptures, with which he has also favoured the public. I have the honour to remain, 
Dear Sir, 
sincerely your obedient humble Servant, 
HENRY HOWARD. 
