
About midnight (all others being removed from them) this MILES FOREST and JOHN DICHTON, came into the chamber, and suddenly wrapped up the sly children in the bed-clothes where they lay, keeping, by force, the featherbed and pillows hard upon their mouths, that they were therein smothered to death, and gave up to God their innocent souls, into the joys of heaven, leaving their bodies unto the tormentors, dead in the bed: which after these monstrous wretches perceived, first by the struggling with the pains of death, and after long lying still to be thoroughly dispatched, they laid their bodies naked out upon the bed, and then fetched for JAMES TIRRILL their instigator, to see them, who caused these murderers to bury them at the stairs foot, somewhat deep in the ground, under a great heap of stones. Then rode Sir James in hast to the king, unto whom he showed the manner of their death, and place of burial; which news was so welcome to his wicked heart, as he greatly rejoiced, and with great thanks dubbed (as some hold) this his merciless instrument, knight. But the place of their burial he liked not, saying, that vile corner should not contain the bodies of those princes, his nephews, and commanded them a better place for burial, because they were the sons of a king. Whereupon the priest of the tower took up their bodies, and secretly interred them in such a place, which by the occasion of his death, could never since come to light. 
The continuer of JOHN HARDING tells us from the report of others, that King RICHARD caused sir ROBERT BRANKENBURIE’s priest to close their dead corps in lead, and so to put them in a coffin full of holes, and hooked at the ends with two hooks of iron, and so to cast them into a place called the black deeps at the Thames mouth, whereby they should never rise up, or be any more seen. 
To which effect I have seen their epitaph written by THOMAS STANLEY, bishop of Man, parson of Winwick and Wigan in Lancashire, who flourished in the several reigns of King HENRY VIII, EDWARD VI, queen MARY, and queen ELIZABETH; thus it runs in his Lancashire rhymes: 
In London's tower in one place or another 
Interred lay king Edward and his brother. 
Who by their wicked uncle were guiltless slain, 
and basely buried, yet taken up again 
And cast into the black deep at Thames mouth. 
Now whether wrecked, or tossed from north to south, 
Their relics are, it reckons not; their souls rest 
In heaven amongst God's children ever blessed. 
They were murdered in July, 1483. Edward being thirteen years 
old, and Richard about two years younger.
