JANUARY 1751.
SIR,     Litchfield, Sept. 8, 1751.
On Wednesday the 7th of August last, as some workmen were digging up the earth between the second and third pillar of the fouth isle of the nave of our cathedral, in order to make a vault for the late worthy Gilbert Walmesley; Esq; at the depth of about eight feet, they came to a strong leaden coffin, with several large iron rings fastened to the sides, &c. The lid, (which was banded across with strong leaden ribs) was not soldered to the coffin, as now practised, but laid loose upon it; the lead was very much corroded, so that it easily broke asunder. Upon turning up the lid, the skeleton of a human body presented itself, the smaller bones of which were almost consumed. What appeared remarkable was a dry, friable substance, which lay loosely scattered amongst the bones, and sparkled by candlelight like trees or plants in a frosty morning, in a great measure resembling salt mixed with earth, but quite tasteless, and without any disagreeable smell.
There were also several folds of fine linen cloth, which stuck closely together; some pieces of broad lace (supposed of silver from their blackness), the figure of which is still discernable, tho’ upon handling they fall to dust. A small fragment of each of the above mentioned particulars I have carefully preserved for the inspection of the curious, as it will be impossible to have any more access to the coffin, by reason of its being below the foundation of the new vault.
There was unfortunately no date or inscription to be found on the coffin; and as all the ancient tombs and monuments in this church were, in the grand rebellion, miserably stripped of their brasses, and their inscriptions defaced, it will be impossible to ascertain the time of the interment, or to guess to whom these relics belong; though probably from the lace, &c. it may be some of the bishops of this see, or dignitaries, who used formerly to be buried in their embroidered copes.
I am in hopes this account, through your means, may excite the attention of some of your ingenious correspondents, in order to account for that sparkling substance in the coffin.
I am, yours, &c.Richard Greené.

