KATHARINE VERMILIA, WIFE OF PETER MARTYR. 

BARBARITY towards the dead bodies of heretics is one of the countless forms in which Popish cruelty has displayed itself. To deposit the human body, when divested of life, with respect in the earth, is at once an act of decency and humanity. This recommends itself so strongly to the instinctive feelings of the mind of man that, even in heathen countries, he has shrunk with horror at the idea of depriving any of his fellow-creatures, even an enemy, of the honour of interment. But the Popish Church has shrunk neither from the idea nor from the practice of this atrocity. The canon law, an infallible authority with Papists, denies the rites of sepulture to the mortal remains of heretics, and history tells us how well this law has been obeyed. How often has the wail of anguish proceeded from the Christian church, as from the Jews of old, while she thought, under her persecutions, of her murdered martyrs lying unburied, the prey of ravenous animals: 'O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth!' (Psalm lxxix. 1, 2). To this, as the fate of many of the Waldenses, Milton refers in his well-known and touching sonnet upon the persecutions they endured: 

'Avenge, O Lord! thy slaughtered saints, whose bones Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold.' 

In the reign of Queen Mary, 'the bodies of those who died in prison, either of natural disease or in consequence of hunger, were cast out as carrion in the fields, all persons being forbidden to bury them.' 

But Popish persecutors have carried their barbarity against the dead bodies of heretics even further than by leaving them to lie unburied, or not permitting their burial. They have treated them with every conceivable mark of indignity. They have cast them into ditches, or covered them with heaps of stones, dragged them about, kicked them, and trampled them under foot, mangled them, thrown them into pits, cast them forth to dogs and birds of prey, roasted them upon spits, yea, what is almost incredible and horrible to relate, some of these savage cannibals have fricasseed and actually eaten them. The French Papists, as we learn from a Roman Catholic historian, during the period of the league, made rosaries of the ears of slaughtered Huguenots, on which they might repeat their Ave Marias and Pater Nosters; and in the time of the Irish massacre in the reign of Charles I., when cruelties almost unequalled in the history of depraved human nature were perpetrated, the Irish Papists carried their barbarities, in this respect, to a still greater extent. 

The frenzy of Popish persecutors has also driven them to open the graves of heretics, or of persons suspected of heresy, who had been fortunate enough during life to escape their fury, to take out their bones and burn them; an outrage which, though the dead body is insensible, excites almost as strong a sensation of horror as the casting of the living into the burning pile, for it evinces, as we at once feel, not less malignity and cruelty of heart. Councils and popes have decreed that such persons should be tried, condemned, excommunicated, and that their dust and bones should be committed to the flames; and often have these decrees been carried into effect. Many of the Waldenses, after having been interred twenty-five or thirty years, were dug up, and publicly burned, partly from malice, and partly as a pretext for confiscating their property. Thus also was the dead body of John Wickliffe treated, after it had lain many years in the grave. No man before his time had done so much to undermine the Papacy as Wickliffe, and we can easily imagine the 'leer malign' with which his resurrectionists would, like the grave-digger in Hamlet, 'jowl his skull to the ground, as if it had been Cain's jaw-bone that did the first murder,' and when all the fragments were collected, cast them into the devouring element. Similar was the treatment of the dead bodies of Martin Bucer and Paul Fagius (the former professor of divinity in the university of Cambridge, the latter professor of Hebrew in the same university), which, in the reign of Queen Mary, were dug up and publicly burned in the market-place at Cambridge, on the 6th of February, 1556-7. This scene was enacted at a time when the principal cities of England exhibited the horrible spectacle of the burning of living holy martyrs, and it showed that, had these learned Reformers been then alive, they would have shared the same fate as Rogers, Bradford, Ridley, Latimer, and Cranmer. 

We have been led to make these remarks from their bearing upon the following narrative, which relates not to the life of Mrs. Martyr, but chiefly to the ignominious exhumation of her corpse by Cardinal Pole and his coadjutors, during the reign of Queen Mary, and to the honourable re-interment of her remains in the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. 

KATHARINE VERMILIA, who was originally a nun, was married to Peter Martyr, an Italian Reformer of honourable family, during his residence at Strasburg, whither he had gone upon the invitation of Bucer, and where he had obtained a situation as professor in the academy, on his being obliged, in 1542, to leave his native country to escape the dangers to which his heretical sentiments, and his useful labours in opening the eyes of many to the knowledge of the truth, particularly at Naples and Lucca, had exposed him. They continued at Strasburg till the end of the year 1547, when Martyr having received an invitation from Archbishop Cranmer to come to England, they came to this country, where Martyr was appointed professor of divinity in the university of Oxford. During her residence in England, Mrs. Martyr was distinguished for her good works, especially for her liberality towards the poor. But her life was not spared many years. She died on the 15th of February, 1553-4. 'She was dangerously attacked by quartan ague,' says Martyr, in a letter to a friend after her death,' to which she had for a long time been subject, and departed to be with Christ. God enabled her to exercise such faith, piety, fortitude and constancy in the confession of the truth, even to the last hour, that it was in a manner a miracle to all who were present. Although I rejoice in her felicity, yet I cannot but feel great anguish of spirit in having been so unexpectedly left behind by her at this particular time. On account of the great charity which she always showed towards the poor, she was deeply regretted by almost all the citizens, who regarded her with no common affection; but to me her death has caused a desolation scarcely supportable.' She was buried within the church belonging to Christ Church College, Oxford, near the tomb of St. Frideswide, to whom that church had been originally dedicated. 

Cardinal Pole having appointed commissioners to visit the universities of Cambridge and Oxford, to restore to the colleges the Popish constitutions which had been made void in the time of Edward VI., to make diligent inquiry as to all in the colleges who had not conformed to the Romish religion, now the established faith of the kingdom, and, without delay, to eject every individual on whom the slightest suspicion of heresy rested; this appointment led to the exhumation and burning of the remains of Bucer and Fagius at Cambridge, and to the exhumation and ignominious treatment of Mrs. Martyr's at Oxford. In the work to which we have referred as our principal authority, it is not said that the commissioners had received instructions to perpetrate either of these barbarities. The Cambridge commissioners, as is asserted in that work, having taken up the case of Bucer and Fagius in consequence of a petition presented to them, praying that the dead bodies of these arch heretics, who during life had corrupted many by their pernicious doctrine, should be dug up, it may perhaps be inferred, though not with perfect certainty, that their commission did not contain specific instructions to that effect, but that they acted in the exercise of the large discretionary powers with which their commission invested them. The visitation of the university of Oxford being subsequently to the visitation of the university of Cambridge, the intention formed by the Oxford commissioners to exhumate the corpse of Mrs. Martyr and burn it, was perhaps suggested by the proceedings of the commissioners at Cambridge in reference to the dead bodies of Bucer and Fagius. 

With the commissioners appointed to visit the university of Oxford we have here specially to do. Though varied in their character and attainments, they were all men abundantly inclined to enter with zeal upon the work of their mission. They are thus described by Calfhill: - 'Brooks was a man of no common learning nor of contemptible eloquence; he was of an acute understanding and of easy amiable manners, if the iniquity of those times and the company of bad men had not changed his nature. Ormaneto was remarkable for nothing except intolerable arrogance, in which he so wonderfully excelled, that it is impossible to imagine it carried to greater excess. Coles was unmatched for erudition in his own opinion, but, in the judgment of others, of ordinary attainments. His temper was so extremely severe, that though he had burnt the sacred books and greatly harassed the Reformers, he was dissatisfied with himself as unduly moderate. He could bear nothing with greater difficulty than to understand that any person read Cicero or Plato. The reason of this opposition to classical learning is not very well known, unless, perhaps, it proceeded from his overweening fondness for his own ingenious paradox, 'that ignorance is the mother of true piety.' Morven was advanced in years, a frugal old man, who managed his household establishment with a parsimonious economy, and possessed little ability for maintaining controversies on theological questions, yet he was a most bitter defender of the ancient absurdities of his own religion. Wright⁵ was and is adorned with a combination of natural talents and much acquired learning, nor would one desire more in that man except constancy, which it becomes all good men to preserve, and especially Christian pastors, who should have stable and certain, not erratic and vacillating sentiments on the subject of religion.' 

In coming to the resolution to dig up and burn the corpse of Mrs. Martyr, these commissioners, like those of Cambridge, were guided by the canon law, which enjoins that if any excommunicated or heretical person shall happen to be buried in a church or cemetery, the body shall be dug up. This law was founded on the principle that the interment of heretics within Popish churches and church-yards polluted these consecrated places; and, whenever any such interment had taken place, they were to be shut up, while the performance of divine service in the churches, and the burial of the dead in the churches or cemeteries, were interdicted, till they were first reconciled and consecrated anew by a bishop, by the sprinkling of holy water, and other ceremonies usually observed on such occasions. It was maintained, that to allow heretics to partake of Christian sepulture was to put an open affront on the Divine honour; was to expose to danger the souls of others, who, seeing no mark of reprobation fixed upon heretics after their death, might think that heresy was a harmless thing; was an offence to the faithful, whose consciences were wounded by seeing holy places thus desecrated. But while guided in their purpose of exhumating and burning Mrs. Martyr's corpse by the canon law, the actors were also, doubtless, impelled by revenge for the important services her husband had rendered to the Reformation in England during the reign of Edward VI. They conceived that they could not otherwise sufficiently testify their abhorrence of the doctrines he had taught at Oxford, nor sufficiently hold them up to the detestation of the people. They would have looked with more exquisite pleasure on the flames enveloping Martyr himself, a fate to which he would, in all probability, have been subjected had he been in England, but, as he was happily in a safe asylum on the continent, the next desirable thing was to burn the remains of his wife, who, it was believed, was not less heretical than himself. 

The work in which these commissioners were engaged belonging more to the brutal than to the intelligent part of their nature, they revelled and rioted, in the course of their visitation, like men who had brutal work to perform, or rather like men engaged in the work of the wicked one. With their blood inflamed by strong drink, and driven by violent, exasperated, and headlong passion, they collected as many Bibles and other books treating of scriptural evangelical truth as they could discover, brought them together in the marketplace, and committed them to the flames. In the colleges they found many nonconformists, whom they punished by summary ejection. They next proceeded to carry into effect their purpose as to the burning of the dead body of Mrs. Martyr. To give the face of justice to their proceedings, they thought it necessary to go through some form of trial, as had been done in reference to the burning of the bodies of Bucer and Fagius. In the case of the latter, the Cambridge commissioners cited the dead Reformers three different times to appear to answer for themselves, or any others who might be willing to appear to answer for them; and after these three citations, the accused not rising from their graves to defend themselves, nor any person appearing in their defence, 'for fear,' as Burnet observes, of being sent after them,' the commissioners entered upon the trial by the examination of witnesses. Whether the Oxford commissioners went through the farce of citing Mrs. Martyr to appear to answer for herself, we are not informed; but they summoned all who, so far as they could learn, had any acquaintance or intimacy either with her or with Martyr, to appear before them, to be examined as to what they knew about her heretical principles. Many appeared in obedience to the summons, and they were closely questioned and cross-questioned upon oath as to her religious tenets, but no evidence of her heresy was extracted, all of them, without exception, having declared that, on account of the imperfect manner in which she spoke the English language, they knew not what were her religious sentiments. 

Had the commissioners succeeded in proving her heretical pravity, they would have proceeded exactly as the Cambridge commissioners had done on their establishing the charge of heresy against Bucer and Fagius. They would have condemned her as an obstinate heretic, ordered her dead body to be dug up and delivered to the secular power, as were living heretics, not mentioning, though it was well known, that it was for the purpose of being burned. Then they would have sent a messenger with the sentence to the court at London, in which Cardinal Pole was now the ruling spirit; and in the course of a few days the messenger would have returned, bringing with him orders to burn the dead body of the condemned heretic. 

But having failed in proving her heresy, the commissioners had no authority from the canon law for passing sentence that her dead body should be dug up and delivered to the secular power to be burned. They therefore broke up their sittings without pronouncing upon her any condemning sentence whatever, a circumstance somewhat wonderful, for Popish persecutors have rarely hesitated to punish persons who had excited the suspicion of heresy, however lame the proofs to support the charge. On their return to London they informed the cardinal of all that they had done in the execution of their delegated powers; how they had thrust out many from the colleges for heresy, how they had burned the Bible, and how they had made a searching inquiry into the supposed heretical opinions of Mrs. Martyr, but that, eliciting no evidence against her, they had dropped the case. The cardinal, however, if he was pleased to forego the revenge of burning her body, was not inclined to allow her to escape without some indignity. Shortly after, he wrote a letter to Dr. Marshall, deacon of Christ Church, Oxford, instructing him 'that he should cause the body of Katharine, wife of Peter Martyr, to be dug up, because it lay near the body of the most holy Frideswide.' This surely was no proof of the gentleness of manners, and humanity of disposition, for which Pole's friends have eulogized him: it looks like cruelty of no ordinary kind thus to disgorge its venom, not only upon the living, but upon the dead in their graves. In giving these instructions to Marshall he would, had Mrs. Martyr been proved to be a heretic, have been yielding obedience to the canon law, but the proof of Mrs. Martyr's heresy had never been made out by his commissioners. He had not, therefore, the sanction even of the canons of his own church for ordering her dead body to be thus contumeliously treated. 

Pole could not have committed the business to a more fitting person than Marshall, a violent and furious man, quite familiarized with cruelty, and who entered with heart and soul into every persecuting measure. Delighted with the commission he had received, he was eager to carry it into execution, and he had many associates ready to lend him assistance in so grateful a service. He communicated the cardinal's command to his pot companions, with whom he had mingled in many a scene of wild and roaring debauchery, and they unitedly resolved to execute the task on an evening, for the sake of secrecy. On the evening appointed they were assembled together and carousing over their cups. The work in prospect was the great theme of their talk. A company of drunken jockeys could hardly have been more boisterous. The toasts went round; and while drinking each other's health, they did not forget to drink the extermination of heretics, and damnation to the soul of the old heretical dame whose rotten bones and mouldering dust they were going to disturb. 'By the Virgin Mary, by St. Frideswide,' said they, 'we shall give her a surprise to-night; we shall awake Fustiluggs from her dreams; that we will.' They gave her the name of Fustiluggs because she was somewhat corpulent. Late in the evening, when it was dark, leaving off their Bacchanalian orgies, Marshall and his associates, accompanied by workmen previously hired, who carried their spades and mattocks along with them, proceeded to the church, to the grave of Mrs. Martyr. The work of disinterment commenced; her remains were dug up, and, by the orders of Marshall, they were placed upon the shoulders of one of the workmen, and carried away to a dunghill in the neighbourhood of his stables. Here, as being unworthy of Christian sepulture, they were buried as unceremoniously, and with more malignity, than if they had been the carcass of a dog. 'Such was the brutal scene,' says Calfhill,' enacted by wicked men in those infamous times, when impiety had so taken possession of England that the baser and the more cruel any one was, so much the better and the holier a man was he accounted.' Even among heathen nations this revolting transaction would have excited general abhorrence, and those concerned in it would have been shunned as polluted, and regarded as just objects of the Divine vengeance. 

'What guilt 
Can equal violations of the dead? 
The dead, how sacred! sacred is the dust 
Of this heav'n-labour'd form, erect, divine! 
When ev'ry passion sleeps that can offend; 
When strikes us ev'ry motive that can melt; 
Then, spleen to dust! the dust of innocence, 
An angel's dust! this Lucifer transcends, 
When he contended for the patriarch's bones. 
'Twas not the strife of malice, but of pride; 
The strife of pontiff pride, not pontiff gall.' 
[Young's Night Thoughts, Night iii.] 

The remains of Mrs. Martyr continued to lie in this vile receptacle until the reign of Elizabeth, when they were restored to honourable sepulture. Shortly after Elizabeth's elevation to the throne, she appointed ecclesiastical commissioners, among whom were Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Grindal, Bishop of London, and Richard Goodrich, a layman, investing them with full power and authority to adopt measures for more fully establishing the Protestant faith, and delivering the nation from the tyranny and superstition of Popery. These commissioners were not ignorant of the ignominious treatment of the corpse of Mrs. Martyr, by Cardinal Pole and his parasites, and they came to the resolution of rendering due honour to her memory by a public and honourable re-interment. In coming to this resolution they were influenced partly by reverence for her sex and her excellent character, partly by respect for her husband, Mr. Martyr, who, at the request of Edward VI., had come to England, and had laboured so assiduously and faithfully in instructing the youths of the university of Oxford in the Protestant faith, as to entitle him to the gratitude of that university and of the kingdom. They felt it to be a disgrace to their country that this distinguished man should receive such 'a recompense of ingratitude as to have the corpse of his wife, who was a godly woman and a stranger, who was kind to many, especially to the poor, and injurious to none, either by word or deed, spitefully dug out of her grave and buried in a dunghill without any authority, even from the canon law or from the laws of England, bad as many of them were in the reign of Mary. 'To all good natures,' says Foxe, 'the fact seemed odious, and of such as be imbued with humanity, utterly to be abhorred.' 

These commissioners sent instructions to certain trustworthy Protestants in the university of Oxford to make inquiry into the whole circumstances connected with Mrs. Martyr's exhumation, and to wash out this stain of infamy from Oxford by removing her body from the dunghill into which it had been thrown, and publicly burying it in some honourable place. The persons to whom this business was intrusted, called before them all who had been concerned in the execrable transaction, or who could communicate to them any particulars respecting it. By this means they succeeded in gaining the necessary information. They were shown, in the north part of Christ Church, not far from the tomb of Frideswide, the spot where Mrs. Martyr had been buried upon her death. They were next conducted to the dunghill, in the neighbourhood of the stables of Dr. Marshall, into which her body, when disinterred, had been cast. The corpse was dug up; and the disjoined members were carefully collected into a chest, carried to the church, and committed to the care of the church wardens, who were ordered to watch over them until an opportunity should be afforded, on one of the most celebrated holy days, for a large number of people to assemble, and re-inter them, with every mark of honour, in Christ Church. 

While James Calfhill, sub-dean of Christ Church College, was sedulously making all the preparations requisite for an honourable funeral, he accidentally discovered, in the most concealed part of the church, two little silk bags, in which were carefully covered and wrapped up a parcel of bones, said to be the bones of St. Frideswide. As this Popish saint, according to the tradition, lived so far back as the eighth century, it is very doubtful whether these were her bones. But the priests affirmed that they were hers, and by means of them practised the same impudent tricks and impositions which they systematically practised by means of the relics of other saints, thereby levying large contributions from the people, who, from their ignorance and superstition, eagerly believed in the virtues attributed to the bones of the saint, and in the miracles wrought by them. The canons of that church religiously preserved them, and on holy days were wont to take them out of the bags and place them upon the altar, in public view, that they might be worshipped by all with great reverence. The superstitious multitude might then be seen throwing themselves prostrate before the exhibited relics with their hands clasped together, and remaining in that posture as if in earnest prayer. Among other delusions connected with this patron saint, the priests attributed to her such power and sanctity, that they affirmed that the church would fall into ruins were her bones removed from within the walls, and the gulls of the priests as fully believed this as they believed in their own existence. Calfhill, rightly judging that it would be unchristian to imitate the barbarity of the Papists, did not wish to offer any indignity to the bones of the Popish saint, notwithstanding the impious and blasphemous uses to which they were applied, for though they might not be her bones, yet they were probably those of some human being. He therefore ordered them to be mingled with the bones of Mrs. Martyr -- a revolting idea to the Papists; but this mixture served, and was intended for, a twofold purpose. By rendering it impossible to distinguish between the bones of the saint and those of the heretic, it would secure Mrs. Martyr's from the subsequent indignity of disinterment, should Popery again triumph in England, and it would prevent in future the idolatrous worship of St. Frideswide's. The bones of the heretical lady could not be dishonoured by being taken up and cast into some vile place, without a similar degradation being done to the bones of the Popish saint; and should any attempt be afterwards made to dig up the bones of the latter for Popish idolatrous purposes, they might be mistaken for those of Mrs. Martyr, and thus the blunder committed of worshipping the bones of a heretic. An oration having been delivered to a numerous auditory, declaring the reasons of the present proceedings, the remains of Mrs. Martyr, with the bones of St. Frideswide enclosed in the same chest, were deposited in one common grave in the upper part of the church, towards the east, with great solemnity, amidst a large concourse of the principal inhabitants of Oxford, on January 11, 1561. 

On the day following, which was the Sabbath, one of the fellows of the university, named Rogerson, delivered a pious, learned, and appropriate discourse to a numerous auditory. He dwelt upon the common destiny of mankind as subject to mortality, and upon the atoning blood and sacrifice of Him who hath brought life and immortality to light by the gospel. He took the opportunity, afforded by the occasion, of animadverting upon the oppression, injustice, and cruelty of the late reign, and of congratulating his hearers upon the happy change which a merciful Providence had brought about by the accession of the Princess Elizabeth to the throne. He made honourable mention of that noble army of martyrs who were committed to the flames for the Word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, eulogized their integrity and purity of life, their patience, fortitude, and faith in the prison and at the stake. He spoke in commendation, though not with exaggerated praise, of Mrs. Martyr, whose dead body, after being buried for the space of two full years, had been dug from the grave, and treated by Popish persecutors with greater ignominy than they would have done to the carcass of a brute beast. He proposed her life as an excellent pattern for imitation, and exposed Popish cruelty as a rock to be avoided. His object in bringing forward these facts was not to wound the hearts of the pious by reviving the memory of that tyrannical domination from which England had suffered so much, but rather to animate them to magnify God for having delivered them from it, and to stir them up to combine their energies for the utter overthrow of the antichristian interest. 

To put farther honour upon Mrs. Martyr, Latin and Greek poems, commemorative of her worth and condemnatory of the inhumanity exercised towards her dead body, composed by eminent scholars of the university of Oxford, were posted upon the church doors. As might be expected from men who had escaped, as from a shipwreck or earthquake, the barbarous and shocking cruelties of the preceding reign, these verses, which are printed in the work already referred to as our chief authority in this sketch, are written with something like sensations of shuddering horror at the persecuting and sanguinary spirit that had raged, and with strong feelings of gratitude to Providence for the deliverance of the nation, when brought to the brink of ruin by Popery and tyranny. The first of them, written by James Calfhill, begins thus: - 'The Pope at that time ruling supreme, the violent herd of wolves entered and destroyed the pious flock of the Lord. The mitred leaders entered, tyrants entered, filling houses with slaughter and blood. Nor could the bodies of living saints, burned on the dreadful funeral pile, satisfy these savage beings; they cast out heretical corpses, not long buried, from their resting-places, and exercised their ferocity on rotten bones. Neither honourable feeling, nor reason, nor piety, could subdue their outrageous violence. A woman who, an exile from her native country, brought great honour and succour to our city—a woman on whose life there was no stain, and who, when on her death-bed, had given a clear testimony of her faith in God, being torn from her grave and despoiled of, what is above all, her honourable reputation, suffered the most shameful indignities, by being thrown into a filthy place.' The writer next compares these cruel persecutors to Achilles, who, having slain Hector, dragged the dead body of the Trojan hero at his chariot round the walls of Troy, and only restored it to Priam, Hector's father, for honourable interment, on receiving a large pecuniary ransom. Next passing to the altered auspicious state of affairs, he adds, 'Nor could that truculent treading down power continue long, Christ being the avenger. Better fortune, exceeding their expectations, has now returned to the wretched, and fostering piety possesses its ancient abode. Therefore, now receive, O Katharine, the honour of thy old sepulchre—now possess that to which thy piety entitles thee.' 

In another of these poems the author says, 'The heathen dreaded violating an old sepulchre, whilst yet reason was their sole teacher. Romulus and Solon prohibited by law any even to speak ill of the dead. Darius, having dared to violate the tomb of Semiramis, did not find gold, but was met with this inscription, 'Ah miserable man! ah! you would be unwilling to disturb the hidden receptacles of the dead, were you not wickedly persuaded by idleness, the belly, and riches. But ye Popish devotees, members of the tyrant Antichrist, commit crimes more hideous than Darius. He, pitifully laughed at, lost the gold; ye heap up wealth by means of disinterred bones. He was deceived; ye practice deception upon all, in giving putrid bones to be the objects of our worship. But, О ye shavelings, ye gave not the bones of Katharine Martyr to be honoured, ye dug them up to be dishonoured in a dunghill. Say, what has she deserved? What crimes has she, being dead, committed? If while in life she did mischief, she has done nothing of the kind since her death. 'She committed crimes,' you say, 'in not offering incense to Baal; when alive she was guilty of heresy.' O happy Mrs. Martyr! taken away by a propitious death; hadst thou, on whom, when dead, punishment has been inflicted for the heretical noxiousness of thy life, been forcibly taken, when living, out of the desolated flock, thou shouldst have been burned a martyr, even as thou wert Martyr by name.' The author closes by exulting at the thought that the Papists had been unable, by fire and sword, and all their persecuting appliances, to prevail, God having interposed for the deliverance of the oppressed. 

Thus did the Reformers, on the accession of Elizabeth, vindicate the dead, whose sepulchres the persecutors in their frantic rage had violated. 

The Papists having been twitted by the Protestants for the base treatment of Mrs. Martyr's remains, as an apology for their conduct they laboured to bring discredit upon her reputation. This called forth rejoinders, in which her honest name was amply vindicated. Dr. George Abbot, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, in an excellent work against the Romanists, defends her memory from their malignant defamatory attacks. He testifies both to her worth and ingenuity, and his testimony is of greater value as resting on information derived from persons to whom she was personally known. 'She was,' says he, 'reasonably corpulent, but of most matron-like modesty; for the which she was much reverenced by the most. She was of singular patience, and of excellent arts and qualities. And, among other things for her recreation, she delighted to cut plumbstones into curious faces, of which, exceedingly artificially done, I once had one, with a woman's visage and head attire on the one side, and a bishop with his mitre on the other, which was the elegant work of her hands. By divers yet living in Oxford [1604] this good woman is remembered and commended, as for her other virtues so for her liberality to the poor, which by Mr. Foxe, writing how she was treated after her death, is rightly mentioned. For the love of true religion and the company of her husband, she left her own country to come into England in King Edward's days.
