

Of the BODY OF MAN.
CRY, said the Spirit: What fall I cry? Ask the Prophet. All flesh is grass. - A problem as true in philosophy, as in theology, and that in a most strict and literal sense likewise,
Who would think it, yet most certain it is, that all this bulky, ponderous body, which we behold, and carry about us, was once, every part of it, green grass growing visibly in the open fields. By grass I mean, in general, what vegetables spring out of the ground.
The better to conceive of this natural mystery (which probably you never once thought of before) here presented unto you, think seriously with yourself, freely, and without prejudice contemplate the subject, and the truth thereof will soon rush in upon your mind with full force of conviction, even so as you cannot miss of being highly pleased with such a surprising lecture of natural philosophy.
How amazing is it to find that this beautiful body, with all its lovely limbs, were actually once growing green in the fields and meadows; and that the eyes of ancestors had formerly beheld us springing up in that, vegetable form.
But how, may you ask, can we make this grand paradox good, and prove the truth of this so very strange assertion?
Pray attend: Was you not in infancy fed with milk and bread-corn? Have you not been fed with wheat ever since? Your drink, what has it been, but either the tincture of barley, the juice [Page 3 262 All Flesh is Grass, literally proved.] juice of the grape, or of apples? The flesh with which you have been nourished to so large a stature, belonged once to the four-footed animals, to the fowls of the air, or to the fish of the sea ; and every one of these have been fed either with corn or grass.
Yea, our fine bodies owe their original, and sustentation, either mediately or immediately, to the animal and vegetable food entirely; to the roots and stalks, to the leaves or to the fruits of plants, or to the flesh of brute creatures, which have passed through our mouths perhaps these 20 or 60 years, and all the mouths of our parents and predecessors before us: our, curious, plump structures had become mere skeletons, our limbs dry, with our bones, and our trunk, and ribs, the statue of death, had they not received perpetual recruits from the field.
This very flesh, which I now call mine, has not been so long, but did belong to the sheep, or the ox, before it became part of me, 'and served to clothe their bones, before it covered mine. And again, some portion of myself was once hurried through the air in the breast of a partridge, shot, or catched in a net; and another piece of me was frightfully driven through the fields, but the other day, before the full-mouth'd hounds, on the legs of an hunted hare, which was next prepared for my table.
Pray, had you ever so strange a thought, as this before, and can you believe it now! or, upon a survey of the argument, can you tell how to deny it for what are hares and partridges, &c. made of, but growing herbage and shattered corn?
Even the very fish we eat of, whether from the river or the sea, are all, in their original, a kind of grass also: They have been fed partly by sea-weeds, and partly. by lesser fish, which they have devoured, whose prime and natural nourishment was from some vegetable watery world.
In short, whether we have eaten cheese or butter, bread or milk; whether we have fed an ox, hog, or sheep, or on the fowls of the air, I am certain this old body of mine, and every part thereof, even to teeth and nails, and the very hairs of my head also, are all' borrowed originally from the green grass, or vegetable kingdom.
Everything of us that has not a thinking power, that is not mind and spirit, and that is not the original solid stamen of us, was once growing like grass on the ground; or was made of the roots which supported some herbage, and in time may revert into the like state again.
There is an universal circulation of all things terrene, and our very bones will, by and by, be flying about in the air.
Is поt philosophy then an entertaining study, that teaches us our original; and these astonishing operations of divine wisdom and providence, which clothes us with a body made out of transformed grass?
Who can cavil at, or in the least doubt of the truth of the affection, that all men are grass; and not only like unto, but was once in reality very grass, the green herb of the field.
But, after all, this makes only one portion of us, our outward, visible, ponderous, corruptible, perspirable, bulky body, and dissolves all in the grave, and returns back to its congenial elements again, from which it originally came, never to rise up such a gross body more; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven.
While the prime,' true, real, proper, organical, invisible, staminal body, not a fluid, but a solid, lasting principle, the mould or outlines of the other, that continues constantly with us all our lives long, which the other portion cannot do, but is continually fleeting and flying off, while fresh recruits of like matter supply their place; so as in that respect a man may have a new body every seven years. But this solid, organical, staminal body, interwoven with the other, and serving as a' mould thereto, is indeed laid in the grave along with it; but, like the plantule in a seed sown, is that very identical body which will rise again, when every man shall possess his own body, to be re-united to the soul at the last day. To this staminal body, does not St. Paul allude by these words; “That which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every feed his own body”
The first is for this life only; the last, both for this and the life to come. - But of this staminal body, perhaps, hereafter. I am, Sir, &c. Leigh, April, 1768. J. Cook


