
CHATHAM. 
And here give me leave (courteous reader) to turn back to this church situate near Rochester, only to set down a strange burial in this churchyard, thus related by LAMBARD in his perambulation of Kent. 
Although (saith he) I have not hitherto, at any time, read any memorable thing recorded in history, touching Chatham itself, yet, for so much as I have often heard (and that constantly reported) a popish illusion done at that place; and for that also it is profitable to the keeping under of feigned and superstitious religion, to renew to mind the priestly practises of the old time (which are declining to oblivion) as it is pleasant to retain in memory the monuments and antiquities of whatsoever other kind: I think it not amiss to commit faithfully to writing, what I have received credibly by hearing, concerning the idols sometime known by the names of our lady, and the rood of Chatham and Gillingham. It happened (say they) that the dead corps of a man (lost through shipwreck belike) was cast on land in the parish of Chatham, and being there taken up, was by some charitable persons committed to honest burial within their churchyard: which thing was no sooner done, but our lady of Chatham finding herself offended therewith, arose by night, and went in person to the house of the parish clerk (which then was in the street, a good distance from the church) and making a noise at his window awaked him. This man at the first (as commonly it fares with men disturbed in their rest) demanded, somewhat roughly, who was there; but when he understood by her own answer, that it was the lady of Chatham, he changed his note, and most mildly asked the cause of her coming. She told him, that there was lately buried near to the place where she was honoured, a sinful person, which so offended her eye with his ghastly grinning, that, unless he were removed, she could not but (to the great grief of good people) withdraw herself from that place, and cease her wonted miraculous working in that place amongst them. And therefore she willed him to go with her, to the end that (by his help) she might take him up and cast him again into the river. The clerk obeyed, arose and waited on her towards the church; but the good lady (not wonted to walk) waxed weary of the labour, and therefore was enforced, for want of breach, to sit down in a bush by the way, and there to rest her. And this place, forsooth, as also the whole track of their journey (remaining ever after a green path) the town-dwellers were wont to show. Now after a while, they go forward again, and coming to the churchyard, dug up the body, and conveyed it to the waterside, where it was first found. 
This done, our lady shrank again into her shrine, and the clerk packed home to patch up his broken sleep, but the corps now eftsoons floated up and down the river as it did before. Which thing being at length espied by them of Gillingham, is was once more taken up and buried in their churchyard. But see what followed upon it, not only the Rood of Gillingham (say they) that a while before was busy in bestowing miracles, was now deprived of all its former virtue; but also the very earth and place, where this carcass was laid, did continually for ever after settle and sink downward. 


