On the 11th day of January happened a remarkable action at Oxford; viz. the solemn restoring of Katherine Vermilia (sometime the pious wife of the same Peter Martyr) to honourable burial, after a strange indignity offered to her corpse. For our Archbishop, together with Grindal, Bishop of London, Richard Goodrick, Esq. and others, by virtue, as it seems, of the Queen's ecclesiastical Commission, (appointed to take cognisance of matters belonging to religion, and redress of Papal abuses) deputed certain fit persons in that University (whereof James Calfhil, B.D. was one) to inquire into a barbarous and inhuman usage of that virtuous woman's dead body; that two years after her burial had been dug up and carried away, and buried in a dunghill belonging to Dr  Marshal, then Dean of Christ's church: whereof he himself was the great actor by authority from Cardinal Pole. 
Her restitution accordingly was performed after this manner. The persons appointed for this business cited those that were concerned in the digging up of the body: who being charged, showed them the place where she was first buried: which was near St. Frideswide's tomb, on the north part of Christ's church. Then requiring where they had conveyed the corpse, they were conducted towards Dr Marshal's stables; and there out of a dunghill it was dug up, not quite consumed. Which they caused to be carefully deposited in a convenient receptacle, and so brought back therein to the said church, leaving it thus to be watched by the officers of the church, till they might conveniently celebrate the re-interment. There were belonging to the said church two silk bags, wherein the bones of St. Frideswide were wrapped up and preserved: which were wont on solemn days to be taken out and laid upon the altar, to be openly seen and reverenced by the superstitious people. Now, for the preventing of any future superstitions with those relics, (and yet that no indecency might be used towards the said saint and foundress's bones,) and withal, for the better securing of this late buried holy woman's bones from being disturbed any more, by the advice of Mr. Calfhill, the bones of both were mixed and put together; and so laid in the earth in one grave in the upper part of the said church toward the east; after that a speech had been made to a very great auditory, declaring the reason of the present undertaking. 
And on the next day, being the Lord's day, one of the society, named Rogerson, preached a learned and pious sermon upon the occasion: and therein took notice of the cruelty exercised by Papists to the bodies of innocent and good men, which they burnt alive; and then, of the horrible inhumanity showed to this pious matron's dead body: whose life, he said, he propounded as an excellent pattern to imitate; and the cruelty of that worst sort of men, concerned in it, as a rock to avoid. Not with intention to wound godly hearts with the mentioning of that tyrannical power that then prevailed, but rather that he might inflame them to set forth the praise and glory of God, and to do all their endeavours for the utter overthrow of that ungodly dominion.' And for her further honour, the University hung upon the church doors many copies of Latin and Greek verses composed by eminent members thereof. This is the sum of what Calfhill, one of the chief managers, wrote to Bishop Grindal concerning this matter. 
The Papists have been twitted by Protestants with this base usage of this good woman: and they to lessen their fault have laboured to disparage and defame her. One of them thought he did some right to their cause in calling her Fustiluggs, being somewhat corpulent. This occasioned Dr. George Abbot, in his excellent answer to that Romanist, to say some things remarkable of her: which he had the opportunity of knowing, being himself of the University of Oxford, and living in or near those times. 'She was,' said he, reasonably corpulent, but of most matron-like modesty: for the which she was much reverenced by the most. She was of singular patience, and of excellent arts and qualities. And among other things for her recreation, she delighted to cut plumb-stones into curious faces and countenances; of which, exceeding artificially done, I once had one, with a woman's visage and head-attire on the one side, and a bishop with his mitre on the other: which was the elegant work of her hands. By divers yet living in Oxford [anno 1604.] this good woman is remembered, and commended, as for her other virtues, so for her liberality to the poor: which by Mr. Fox, writing how she was treated after her death, is rightly mentioned. For the love of true religion, and the company of her husband, she left her own country to come into England in King Edward's days. And so good was her fame here, that when Papists in Queen Mary's time, being able to get nothing against her, being dead, were yet desirous to wreak their spleen upon her integrity: and would needs rage upon the bones of her, a woman and a stranger; and took them out of her grave from Christian burial, and buried them in a dunghill.' 
Whereupon one made these verses [which] Dr Abbot translates [from Latin]: 
The Popish crew have evermore the female sex embraced: 
How is it, that a woman's corpse they have from grave displaced? 
Thus if you ask, right readily mine answer may be this: 
Their bodies dead they care not for; live ones they clip and kiss.
