The following by "one who was present" appears in the Dunfermline Saturday Press :-
The chief object in laying the following narrative before your readers is to impress them with the inexcusable delay in the erection of a monument over Bruce's grave in the Abbey Church. On the 17th February, 1818, a meeting of magistrates, heritors, and ministers, along with Mr Wm. Burn, architect, was being held in the Townhouse, Dunfermline, when a message was brought to them from the labourers engaged in levelling the site in the Psalter Churchyard, preparatory to founding the New Abbey Church, intimating that they had discovered a tomb, apparently of some person of note; whereon the meeting immediately adjourned, and repaired to the spot personally to examine the tomb and ascertain the nature of the facts reported. They were shown a vault, which was forthwith opened, and which gave unmistakable evidence of being the tomb of King Robert the Bruce, of glorious memory, the achiever of Scotland's independence. The discovery of the body of Bruce touched a patriotic chord that vibrated in the Scottish breast, and gathering numbers soon thronged the approach to the hallowed grave, which had remained undisturbed for nearly five centuries. The coffin was deposited in an inner vault contained within the larger one.
On removing its cover of flag stones, perforated with iron rings, the body was discovered swathed in lead and above this above this it was wrapped in cloth of gold which had been plaited round his head so as to resemble a crown. The oak coffin in which the body lay was nearly moldered down in the vault, although a few fragments still remained, of which I possess a small piece, now a realist. A friend who stood near me, B. G--, obtained a small shred of the gold cloth, of which he offered me part in exchange for a piece of paper to hold it in, and which I foolishly lost by hesitating to tear a letter on which I placed some value. Mr G- preserved the precious realist for many years in a tastefully wrought box with glass cover, and took great pleasure in exhibiting it to his friends. The rev. historian of Dunfermline records that part of the coffin was perforated with large headed iron nails; their marks remain in the piece I possess, and which I first saw in the hands of Robert Boner, senior, when wrenching out the nails. This piece of the coffin I lifted in presence of John Boner, his nephew, contractor for the church, next morning, near to the closed vault. The vault. as historically known, was reopened in November, 1819, in presence of the Daroos of Exchequer. Doctors Gregory
and Munro, and select party. The skeleton was afterwards wrapped up in its original lead covering, placed in a new leaden coffin, and embedded in melted pitch, and the vault was subsequently closed. I have pleasure in relating that my father, who was present at the opening of the tomb in February, 1818, on writing the same evening to a nephew in America, stated to him that he was now an old man and had never seen a living king, but that he had seen that day the body of the
great King Robert Bruce lying in his grave.
