
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.”
SIR,
On October 24th the Times published a letter by me, calling attention to the insufficiency of the death certificate in this country, as illustrated by the case of the girl Clover, one of Nail's victims. Mr. Seymour Hidden wrote thereon as an opponent to cremation, with a challenge to me, and I replied to him twice in that journal, the correspondence ending with my last letter. But Mr. Hidden revived the discussion by reading a paper at the Society of Arts on November 23rd, and called on me with some insistence for a reply. It appeared to me that the pages of a medical journal would be a more fitting place in which to consider the numerous questions he raised. I therefore venture to ask you to allow me to do so in your columns.
Permit me to say at the outset that in again replying to Mr. Seymour Hidden, I wholly decline to be led into a long controversy concerning the numerous settled and unsettled questions to which he alludes in his lengthy paper. Moreover, a considerable portion is occupied with more or less disparaging personalities affecting myself and others who think with me, which I decline to notice further. I shall, therefore, make my communication as short as possible, and dispose of the most salient and important points.
Mr. Hidden says, “He hears from me for the first time that burial within the earth is a propagator of infection and a cause of increase in the zymotic death-rate.” Let me ask him then for what reason does he suppose that intramural interment was forbidden by law some years ago in London and in all our large towns, and this, at great cost and inconvenience, to their inhabitants? The question whether or no the graveyard was a source of danger - if it were a question even then! - was at all events settled by that famous and exhaustive investigation conducted in 1849 by the great pioneers of sanitary reform - Southwood Smith, Chadwick, Milroy, Sutherland, Waller Lewis, and others - whose report ought to be read by anyone who is interested in this subject. It is replete with evidence, and transcends in force anything I could ever say. For brevity's sake alone, I will only quote two short passages, which are absolutely conclusive. Let it be observed that these gentlemen knew nothing of bacilli, had no theories, and simply depose to the facts before them: - "We" (the reporters) “may safely rest the sanitary part of the case on the simple fact that the placing of the dead body in a grave and covering it with a few feet of earth does not prevent the gases generated by decomposition, together with putrescent matters which they hold in suspension, from permeating the surrounding soil and escaping into the air above and the water beneath.” The reporters also state that it is a well demonstrated fact that cholera was unusually prevalent in the immediate neighbourhood of London graveyards,” and this was attested especially by Dr Sutherland, who adduces evidence at length which leaves no possibility of doubt as to the fact, nor as to the extent of the mortality thus occasioned. I might multiply examples, described in decisive terms and opinions thereon by the above named, and by subsequent observers such as Dr Edmund Parks, whom no one will deny to be one of the highest and most trustworthy sanitary authorities of modern times.
Next, I have always affirmed that in appropriate soils, at a distance from human habitations, burial may be safely effected. But the spots which were extramural forty years ago are intramural today; and with our increasing population such sites must become still more rare, more required for dwelling sites, for which they are so well adapted. There is, however, one mode of burial in earth to which I make no objection; indeed, I regard it as the most sensible one, nearly approaching in value as it does to the perfection of cremation - namely, the placing the body in a thick bed of quicklime. Now this process is enforced by law in every case where an animal dies of "swine fever," wherever it occurs. And why is such a procedure enforced? Because it is beyond dispute that mere burial in earth will not prevent the spread of the disease.
And here I desire to state emphatically that the safety of the living is not promoted by “perishable" coffins; on the contrary, I have no doubt that this is the most dangerous form of burial for ordinary graveyards and cemeteries. I am quite aware that zymotic infections arise by airborne and also by water-borne elements; and that the latter have probably the larger share in propagating disease. Such infection may be attributed to the agency of bacilli in cholera, typhoid, diphtheria, and the whole range of intestinal and dysenteric diseases. A body recently dead is placed in a coffin so constructed that early contact with earth may be obtained. Here, then, we have the very conditions known to favour cultivation of the bacillus - namely, earth, water (always more or less present), and animal matter. Nothing is wanting but percolating moisture and vicinity to the living, and the train is complete. Probably a stout oak coffin is safer as retaining its contents until, as there is reason to believe, later changes take place which render the offensive mass at least less specifically dangerous than it was in the early stages. Some of these questions await full solution, but it is in the direction indicated that the latest observations seem to point. The onus probandi that the decomposition of these bacilli occurs by contact with earth lies with my opponent. At present earth is known, under the conditions above named, to offer a favourite nidus for their multiplication. Pasteur's conclusive experiments (anthrax) and doctrines are not invalidated even by the denial of Mr. Hidden. His questions to me on this subject are grounded on unproved assumptions, and no further answer can be called for. I have proved my case to the hilt, namely, that burial in earth is fraught with danger to the living. Nor, until this is disproved, is it possible to listen to speculations based on a contrary supposition. Nevertheless, it would appear that some of the present generation have either never learned or have forgotten the evils of the graveyard. Hence, the importance of briefly but sufficiently pointing out the overwhelming evidence respecting them.
Arrived at the second part of the subject I forgive Mr. Haden's imaginative description of the tall chimneys or "vomitoria," as it pleases him to call them, and their products, which have no such existence in fact, since he has had no experience of cremation; a visit to Woking would undeceive him; so would an examination of Père la Chaise at Paris, where 3,000 or 4,000 bodies are burned yearly. He quotes me erroneously about exhumation, and I conclude that he has never read what I originally wrote respecting it, the results of a laborious inquiry. I have merely to declare that I have never modified that statement, that he says I have done so, and I maintain it at this moment as firmly as ever. It is given in detail in my work, “Modern Cremation," and there is, therefore, no need to quote it here. Furthermore, I have all the original records relating to and constituting the inquiry in my possession, and can thus justify the statements I made. Should Mr. Hidden ever take the trouble to read this he will find that the greater part of the observations he has thought proper to make are wholly irrelevant to the subject.
I shall just add that Mr. Hidden is equally unacquainted with the matter in hand when he says, "that in his last letter to the Times Sir H. Thompson 'hopes' to be able to 'devise' a death certificate which may be depended upon as a safe warrant for cremation.” I certainly never made such a statement in the Times or elsewhere. I did say I would explain the practice at Woking if called on to do so. I may now define that practice to be precisely the opposite of reliance upon certificates. It consists, in all cases where any doubt arises and a necropsy has not been made, in declining the cremation unless the following condition is complied with. This is that the stomach, a portion of the liver, and one kidney shall be removed, placed in a jar with spirit, sealed in the presence of a witness, and committed to safe custody so as to be produced when required. In all the ordinary cases of application for cremation a certificate stating the cause of death is required from the medical man who attended the case, and also a certificate from a medical man in the neighbourhood, who is required to give his independent opinion, especially in view of the proposal to cremate the deceased. Each of these gentlemen moreover receives a letter, signed by the President of the Cremation Society, requesting to be privately informed of any circumstance which might render further examination desirable. And should this be their opinion, or, if the certificates appear insufficient to the central authority in London, the proceeding above described is made condition which must be complied with before the proposal to cremate is accepted. Such has been the invariable practice of the Society from the commencement of its operations; and I think Mr. Hidden will admit that the material in evidence thus preserved must be in far better condition than any obtained by exhumation. Further, let me be permitted to remark, if the earth does destroy the body with such certainty and rapidity, most organic poisons contained would in a few days, perhaps hours, elude the chemist's analysis as completely as after the act of cremation. Of this the well-known De Pommerais case, cited by Mr. Hidden, is a striking illustration. [See letter to the Times, pp. 14-15.] But the resource described is only occasionally called for, and a necropsy mostly solves the question. I proposed it in very similar terms when writing of the defective operation of the death certificate in 1874; and it is less than two months ago that I required it to be done in a case offered for cremation.
The plan, however, which "Barrister-at-Law” suggested in your columns and which you endorse in a leading article of the British Medical Journal of November 19th, of conferring power on the coroner to order a necropsy in every case where sufficient medical evidence is not forthcoming, to be made by the best available expert, would form a valuable addition to our present system.
To attain far greater certainty as to the fact and especially as to the cause of death than at present exists is my chief aim, and equally whether the destination of the body be a coffin or a crematorium.
I am, etc., HENRY THOMPSON. WIMPOLE STREET, Dec. 3rd.
---

The following are the Letters referred to in the above: -
THE INSUFFICIENCY OF THE DEATH CERTIFICATE. TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES."
Sir, - Whenever death has occurred, the first duty of society, for its own sake, and as an act of justice to the deceased, is to inquire without delay, and ascertain, if possible, the cause of death. During the last nearly twenty years I have on various occasions called public attention to the exceedingly loose and insufficient procedure which takes the place of intelligent investigation in relation to death inquiry in this country, while in many instances no evidence is obtained, so that thousands of persons are annually buried without certificate or inquiry of any kind. The recent case which appeared in your columns on Saturday is but an illustration of the perfunctory mode in which a certificate is very frequently signed, without intention to mislead, from mere failure to elicit by a few simple questions a fact or two, which would have shown that either an autopsy or a coroner's inquiry was absolutely necessary.
The present usage is to entrust the filling up of a certificate, supposed to convey permission to inter a body, to the medical man who has been in attendance, and is therefore believed to be familiar with the facts of the case. Such an one is generally quite competent to give all the information required, and does so. But there is a very large class of cases, of which that above referred to is but one type among several, consisting of persons who are little cared for during life, who may have been without medical aid, or whose position and habits particularly expose them to criminal influences, and who, dying, leave little or no trace of the causes which led to that event to be acquired by their friends, if there be any, or by any official authority as at present constituted.
The dangers of such a system, or rather want of system, were long ago perceived and provided against in France. A medical expert is to be found in every district in Paris (and in part of the country also) who makes a sufficient investigation in every case of death without exception. He takes the evidence of the medical man, and others when necessary, records in the schedule, always to be filled up, the names of relatives, friends, nurses, and others attending the deceased. And if no medical man had charge of the case the inquiry is more rigid. In this way a man practised in such investigations may speedily arrive at a definite conclusion. If not, he orders or makes an autopsy, and then will rarely fail to attain the desired object. In this country such an officer would place the inquiry in the hands of the coroner, who might be relied on to bring the facts of the case to light.
Such a proceeding is simple and effective; and is so, in part, because carried out within 48 or 72 hours after death, and while the body is above ground.
It is less than two years since I sent a copy of all the forms employed by the municipal authority for the city of Paris to every member of the House of Commons, together with a statement in support of the proposal to adopt the French system here. I suggested also that this might be easily done with our existing body of sanitary and health officers distributed throughout the country. This accomplished, it would be exceedingly difficult for a death by foul play to escape detection, and the knowledge of this fact would act powerfully as a check upon those who might be disposed to make criminal attempts. It is high time, I venture to urge, that this or some similar course should be adopted, at all events in our crowded metropolis and in the large cities, and that we should no longer remain behind the French and other Continental nations in affording needful protection to our citizens against dangers which, it must be admitted, are not diminishing either in number or in gravity. It is useless to blink the fact that with increased intelligence comes increased danger in various ways to society, and that security can only be attained by increased measures of precaution, and skill in employing them.
I beg leave to enclose herewith copies of all the forms used in Paris at the present day for the purposes described.
I am, your very obedient servant, HENRY THOMPSON. Wimpole Street, Oct. 23rd.
---

DEATH CERTIFICATES. TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES."
Sir, - I am glad to find that Mr. Seymour Hidden entirely concurs with me in my recommendation of a more stringent inquiry into the cause of death than has been hitherto adopted in this country.
As he thinks “your readers ought to know that this recommendation" (of the French system) "has been anticipated by” himself in 1888, allow me to state that I first advised its adoption, at considerable length, describing the duties of the médecin vérificateur and the forms employed, in the Contemporary Review for March 1874 - which article has been largely quoted, and several times republished during the last eighteen years.
But Mr. Haden's important contribution to the discussion is an account of a single case which occurred under the French system, and he cites it to prove that even this system is “inefficient as a preventive of murder," and that if I relied on it in view of cremation, I should be deceived. He says “one case in proof of this is as good as a dozen" - and I am ready to admit the existence of a dozen such, if he desires it, as will speedily appear.
The case is as follows: Thirteen days only after death a body, having been buried, is exhumed, and examined by the first experts in Paris; they think “the appearances pointed to a vegetable poison as the probable cause of death," but, after a complete series of tests, cannot say what. This, then, is all that exhumation could accomplish. It established nothing, and my thanks are due to Mr. Hidden for adding another to the numerous existing examples illustrative of an important truth I have often insisted on - viz., that poison must be found while the body is above ground, for burial destroys legal evidence as regards the subtler organic poisons almost, if not quite, as effectually as cremation, strychnine being a single notable exception, as is now pretty generally known. Nevertheless, poison was discovered in this case. How? Not by exhumation, which failed, as we have seen, but by scraping some of the vomited matter from the floor - which might as well have been done at first, and would have been had the inquiry been fairly searching and intelligent. Hence the only lesson taught by Mr. Haden's single and sufficient example is the absolute futility of exhumation so far as this poison was concerned. As to the large general subject of poisoning in connexion with cremation I have dealt with it at length elsewhere ("Modern Cremation"), but shall be pleased on some future day, if desired, to show here how we practically deal with it at Woking, and the precautions there adopted.
I quite agree with another correspondent (Dr. Oxford) that the medical attendant should be spared the thankless and often delicate task of certifying, and do not doubt he would sometimes be glad to escape it. Let me say, further, that I believe intentionally deceptive medical certificates to be extremely rare, and that want of care and painstaking in the performance of what has come to be regarded as a mere formality is the chief cause of their insufficiency now.
Lastly, I have never said that the French system is the best possible; I only say that it is a system, and that it is far better than our own procedure. I do not see why we should not make a better one, at all events to meet our own wants. That an absolutely perfect system will ever be devised, which no criminal can evade, few persons will be sanguine enough to expect.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant, HENRY THOMPSON. Wimpole Street, Oct. 28th.
---

THE DEATH CERTIFICATE. TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES."
Sir.--- All I proposed to prove, and did prove, was that the well-known poisoning case, adduced by Mr. Seymour Hidden to show that cremation would have destroyed all traces of the drug, equally demonstrated their disappearance within thirteen days after burial - a cogent illustration that, in regard to the subtle poisons which will in time be substituted for those which are now easily detected, increased care must be taken to examine the body while above ground, and at once, in all circumstances where any uncertainty exists. That is all I contend for. I have already said that we may, perhaps, devise a more efficient mode than the French (with the médecin vérificateur) only referred to as a far better one than our own; as it is also in Mr. Haden's opinion, since he recommended it, as he was careful to show, at the Church Congress, October 3, 1888. Thus he and I are equally affected - if at all - by that officer's failure in exceptionally difficult and complex circumstances. For in the case in question, which occurred in 1863, Dr. de la Pommerais spent an evening with a lady, who, after he left, was suddenly seized with severe vomiting and died in twenty-four hours. By her death he would largely profit, and this as the result of a series of carefully planned, ruthless, and criminal enterprises - the brief summary of a history involving a combination of circumstances happily very rare, fraught with unusual risks for the victim, and offering slender chances of discovery. The very exceptional circumstances of this case were forcibly pointed out in the able letter of Mr. Lowndes, surgeon to the Liverpool police, in the Times of November 1, and which is, indeed an answer, by anticipation, to Mr. Haden's letter. Being a medical man, De la Pommerais obtained a certificate of death from a medical friend that the deceased died from “perforation of the stomach." The examining officer was satisfied, and was thereby guilty of gross neglect of his manifest duty. For if there ever occurred a case in which an autopsy was called for, it was this. Had the body been examined, and not been buried, there can be no doubt the discovery would have been made either directly or by the means which ultimately proved successful, the analysis of the vomit on the floor. Could I desire a more complete and convincing example in support of my contention - in doubtful cases always examine at once?
Still it must be remembered that all this took place nearly thirty years ago; and, although Mr. Hidden may probably not be aware of the fact, the system at that time was far less stringent than it is now. It has become much more so of late years, and fresh regulations have been formed.
So, also, in the case of Matilda Clover, had the medical man who was called followed the Registrar-General's plain instructions, an autopsy would certainly have taken place, and the cause, without a doubt, have been discovered.
All I need say about cremation is that such cases as the above have not the remotest chance of being submitted to that process here. The regulations of the Cremation Society have been carefully made, are rigidly carried out and are, I believe, equal, if not superior, to any plan present followed elsewhere.
I am, Sir, your very obedient servant,
HENRY THOMPSON. Wimpole Street, Nov. 4th.


