This Crypt [Church of St Mary’s Undercroft] has been sadly abused, while the beautiful Chapel above was occupied as the House of Commons, part being used for a gasometer house, while another part was in use as the Speaker's State Dining Room. Considerable interest was some years since excited by the discovery of the embalmed body of an ecclesiastic, built into a rough recess in the north-east angle of the Crypt underneath the windowsill; the body was found wrapped in many folds of cere cloth, and having a carved oak episcopal staff lying diagonally across the breast. The ingenious researches of Mr. PETTIGREW, the well-known antiquarian, apparently established the remains to be those of Stephen Lyndwode, Bishop of St. David's, from 1442 to 1446, and Keeper of the Privy Seal to Henry VI., and author of several ecclesiastical works. He founded a chantry during his life at St. Stephen’s, as his will (which still exists at Lambeth Palace) expresses it," in bassa capella ['in the lower chapel'],” and directed that his body should be there buried. It has been thought that the position where the body was discovered was not that where he was originally buried, but that his descendants either hastily removed his remains to save them from insult at the Reformation, or that his shrine was rifled of its ornaments and the body put, where found, out of the way; this latter supposition has the more probability from the fact that when the body was discovered the coverings of both arms below the elbows were wanting: and as it was usual for bishops, when buried, often to have their gold embroidered greaves, and also their episcopal rings, the spoiler would make prize of these parts. Mr. PETTIGREW obtained leave from the Government to open the wrappings, when it was discovered that, so skilfully had the body been embalmed, that the features were perfectly distinguishable, and even the skin of the face and lips still soft. After this strange disinterment, the poor bishop has found a resting place once more in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey.

