Having thus shown from history, that many of the Sovereigns of Scotland had been interred in the
church of Dunfermline; it is rather surprising that in later times the curiosity of antiquarians should
not have been excited to know whether any of the Royal remains existed in those repositories where
they were said to have been entombed: And it was not till the year 1807, that any attempt was made to ascertain this, when Mr Graham Dalyell, advocate, a gentleman well qualified for making such an investigation, undertook it: And in his interesting publication on the subject, he observes, "It was lately considered peculiarly interesting, to ascertain whether any relics of the tombs or repositories of the Royal remains, might still be extant. Therefore, having previously obtained the acquiescence of those who could have opposed the research, the middle stone of the west row, being the largest, was removed early on the morning of the 28th of July 1807. An early hour was preferred, on purpose to prevent interruption; for the walls surrounding the psalter churchyard were insufficient to guard against the intrusive curiosity naturally expected on the occasion. "The earth immediately below the surface, and even to the depth of two or three feet, had the appearance of having been dug before, though perhaps at a remote period; and nothing whatever was found among it, excepting a few human bones, brittle and rotten. Under this, however, about four or five feet from the surface, a coffin, rudely built of small irregular pieces of sand-stone, along with a scanty portion of lime, and covered in the same manner with similar materials, was found, containing the skeleton of a full-grown person, pretty entire. Its position was not directly below the large stone, but one half of the length further west. It lay among soft humid clay, completely filling the coffin, from which the bones had imbibed so much moisture, that, on lifting a broken one, the water poured from the lower end as on squeezing a sponge. The head, or upper part of the coffin, towards the west, was contracted into narrow compass, just admitting the skull, which was quite fresh, and the teeth sound.
This coffin had certainly never been opened, and I am inclined to ascribe its structure to a more ancient date than the decease of the Kings whose bodies are said to be deposited in the abbey; for I do not conceive that any of them are contained in it. All the bones were returned to their original situation, and the pieces composing the top of the coffin put over them. The morning, by this time, being far advanced, the whole excavation was filled up, and the covering replaced; which operation, as well as removing it, was a matter of considerable difficulty, as it is above nine feet long, more than one half as broad, and several inches thick." 
