August 1840
Mr. Urban,
DURING a recent visit to that interesting edifice, the Abbey Church of Romsey, I became acquainted with a remarkable discovery made there a few months ago, which, as far as I can ascertain, presents some features hitherto unprecedented in our sepulchral antiquities, and I therefore request permission to lay them before your readers.
On the 17th of November last, upon the death of the only son of Mr William Jenvey, the present Churchwarden of Romsey, (a gentleman, I take the liberty to observe, who shows a highly intelligent sense of the curiosity and beauty displayed in the architecture of his church, and a becoming zeal for its due repair and preservation,) it was determined to prepare a grave in that part of the south aisle which forms the space next the first arch of the nave immediately upon entering from the transept, as shown in the annexed plan.
When the workmen had proceeded to between the depth of four and five feet, they came upon a large leaden coffin; the head of which was not placed at all in correspondence with the present building, but towards the northwest; and I was assured that part of the spreading foundation of the contiguous column was placed upon it. This circumstance seems to show that this was an interment made before the erection of the present church, a structure which some writers have been ready to date back to the century before the conquest; but which, from the massive character of its architecture, we must at any rate assign to an early Norman period. Mr. Briton in his Architectural Antiquities, vol. v. which contains several plates of Romsey church, attributes its erection to the early part of the twelfth century.
The coffin is formed of sheet lead, about 1/4 of an inch thick; it is made from three pieces, which are overlapped and welded together without soldering. The lid was formed in like manner, and put on like the lid of a pasteboard box, but secured by iron nails to an inner coffin, or lining of oak. The length of the coffin is five feet; and its height 15 inc. The head is somewhat wider than the foot; the former measuring 18 inc. and the latter 13 inc. It weighed from 14 to 2 cwt.
It is well known that the most customary mode of interring persons of rank and wealth in our ancient churches was in coffins of stone. [Mr. Bloxam remarks that stone coffins were “chiefly used for the interment of the upper classes, from the eleventh to the fourteenth century, after which they were generally, though gradually, superseded by coffins of lead.” Glimpse at Monumental Architecture, &c. p. 55.]
Yet it appears that lead coffins were occasionally used in all ages. They were sometimes employed by the Romans; and three or four decidedly Roman examples have been found in this country. The notices which Mr Gough collected of leaden coffins will be seen in the Introduction to his Sepulchral Monuments, pp. xxxix-xliv. and in his second Introduction, vol. II. pp. lxii. et seq. Among them there are several instances of leaden coffins enclosed within wooden cases; but I have not perceived one of a leaden coffin with a wooden lining, which is the peculiarity that appears to have contributed to the extraordinary results exhibited in the present case.
That lead was occasionally used for coffins in the Saxon times, (to which there is ground to believe this interment may be assigned,) is shown by the recorded statement that Eadburga, abbess of Repton (in the lead district of Derbyshire), who died in 714, sent as a present, to St. Guthlac, dwelling in Lincolnshire, a leaden coffin, sarcophagum plumbeum ; and St. Dunstan, who died in 988, was interred at Canterbury, in two cases of lead, enclosed in a third of oak, which also was covered with lead, confined by nails and iron bands.
But the interior covering of the corpse, whether the coffin was of stone, lead, or wood, was generally either an untanned hide or leather. Leland says that when the tomb of Fair Rosamond at Godstow was opened in his time, it was found that “her bones were closid in led, and within that the bones were closid in leather." A long series of similar instances is collected by Gough; but in no case does he mention a wooden lining to the coffin.
Within these wrappers of skins, or the vestments of silk, woollen, or linen which have been found in ancient coffins when opened, the skeletons have generally appeared nearly complete in their several parts; the larger bones, at least, have seldom been wanting. One remarkable circumstance in the present instance is, that the whole of the bones were reduced to a very trifling quantity of dust. The only exception consisted of two small pieces which, on being placed in the sill of an adjoining window, very shortly crumbled away.
In the ancient stone coffins, one or more holes are generally found perforating the bottom, through which the liquid, generated during the decomposition of the body, might be drained away. In the present case there were no holes at the bottom of the coffin, but the whole body, including the bones, must have been submitted to one action of decay; the moisture generated must have been imbibed by the oaken boards, and from them evaporated through the crevices of the upper part of the coffin. The oak itself is, for the greater part, very sound and compact: it was described to me as the “spine” or very heart, and the “shingles," or smooth parts of the grain, are perfect and visible. In some places it is injured by having been pierced by iron nails from the lid, which have perished by rust and induced a decay in the wood. But the greater part of it has retained the sound qualities of timber felled in the winter, (which was the ancient practice,) and it appears rather shrivelled and consolidated than decayed by age. The only trace of the human body which has perished upon it, is a slight black incrustation. The oaken pillow upon which the head of the corpse rested was also remarkably sound.
We now come to notice that portion of the human remains which is still in perfect preservation - a preservation as extraordinary as the total disappearance of the other parts of the body. This is the head of hair, with its long-plaited tail, of which a representation is given in the upper part of the plate. The whole of this hair is in perfect existence and shape, matted together like a peruke newly sent out from a wigmakers. Even the very roots of the hairs are apparent, whilst the only discernible remains of the scull are in the form of a slight white powdering. The general colour is a bright brown. [ Mr. Gough remarks, “It has been supposed to be the nature of hair to acquire a yellowish hue in the grave," and he gives instances, vol. I. p. Lxxxii.]
The durable quality of hair is generally known; but probably no more striking instance than the present was ever observed of its perfect preservation accompanying the total decay of other parts of the body.
In one of the barrows in Greenwich Park opened in 1784 by the Rev. James Douglas, he found, only nine inches from the surface, a braid of human hair, which is represented in the xxiid. plate of his Nænia Britannica. “The braid was tenacious and very distinct; and the hair itself, which was of an auburn colour, contained its natural phlogiston.” It was accompanied by some remains of cloth, both of woollen and linen. These remains and those found in adjoining barrows, were at tributed by Mr. Douglas to the fifth and the beginning of the sixth century. The same author also mentions that “There is now deposited in the Vatican a skull with hair; which, by the braid and the ornaments upon it, appears to have been of a female, and to have been interred 1400 years. It was found not far from the Tiber, near Rome.” [Mr. Douglas adds, that “ Human hair, after death, is known upon some bodies to increase greatly. Mr. John Pitt assured me, that on visiting a vault of his ancestors in Farley chapel, Somersetshire, to give orders for some necessary repairs, he saw the hair of a young Lady Chandos, which had, in a most exuberant manner, growed out of the coffin and hanged down from it; and by the inscription she was buried considerably upwards of a hundred years since." - It is a well-known fact that the beard and nails grow for some time after death; and it might be imagined that a love of the marvellous had improved this circumstance into the miraculous story related by Mr. Jobu Pitt. It does not, however, surpass two which we find in the old Cyclopedia of Chambers; one related by Wulrerus in the “ Philosophical Collections," of a woman buried at Norinberg, whose coffin, forty-three years after her death, was found plentifully sprouting with hair; and, on being opened, the whole corpse, in its perfect shape, was found covered over with a thick-set hair, long and curled; but when the head was handled, “there was neither skull nor any other bone left; yet the hair was solid and strong enough." In the decay of the body this forms an illustration of our Rumsey case. The other anecdote is quoted from the same source, of “a man hanged for theft, who, in a little time, while he yet hung upon the gibbet, had his body strangely covered with hair.”]
Mr. Gough also mentions the discovery in Woodbridge church, in 1792, of a lock of hair braided, two feet and a half long, in perfect preservation, though encompassed by nothing but bones nearly crumbled to powder. As soon as it was exposed to the air, it changed its colour from a beautiful brown to a dark red. And in the choir of Norwich cathedral, in 1780, was found “some hair, supposed of a bishop or person of eminence, without any pieces of coffin or bones.”
The present very remarkable relic is preserved by the sexton of Romsey, together with a portion of the pillow, as shown in our sketch, deposited in a very neat glass case. The leaden coffin is also preserved within an enclosure formed by iron railing in the apses of the south aisle of this very curious Norman church. There I hope it will safely remain. I regret that the wooden lining was not kept entire within it; that, however, has been cut into pieces, and, by the courtesy of the churchwarden, a portion of it was presented to me to bring to London. Yours, &c. J. G. N.

