
Account of the Body of EDWARD THE First, as it appeared on opening his tomb in the year 1774. By SIR JOSEPH AYLOFFE, BARONET., V.P.S.A. and F.R.S. 
The royal warrants repeatedly issued by king Edward the Third, and his two immediate successors, directed to the treasurer and the chamberlains of their exchequer, concerning the renewal of the cere-cloth in which the body of Edward the First was wrapped and the total silence of all our historians, and the public records, as to a similar attention having been paid to the corpse of any other of our deceased monarchs; are circumstances that not only indicate the high veneration in which king Edward the First was held during a long series of years after his decease; but when considered, together with the strong injunctions under which, it is said, that king, in his last moments, laid on his son, to send his heart to the holy land, attended by 140 knights, and to carry his remains along with the army until Scotland was reduced to obedience; gave rise to an opinion, that upon his decease a more than ordinary care was taken to preserve his body from putrefaction; and that, in subsequent times, the utmost endeavours were used for preventing decay. 
At this distant period, it became difficult to ascertain how far such an opinion may be founded on truth; more especially, as the historians, who flourished in the reigns of his son and grandson, Edward the Second and Edward the Third, afford very little information on the subject, and as there was not now remaining, either in official books or elsewhere, any memoranda of the particular manner in which the corpse of king Edward the First was treated previous to its being laid in the sepulchre. 
Weaver [Weever], who is the earliest of our English writers, that take notice of the before-mentioned instruments, Concerning the renewal' appears to have made some enquiry into the purpose for which they were issued. That author, speaking of the death of king Edward the First, says, Such was the care of his successors to keep his corpse from corruption, that the cere-cloth, wherein his embalmed body was enwrapt, was often renewed, as doth appear upon record.' Monsieur Rapine, relying on the same authority with Weaver, asserts, that the body of king Edward the First was done over with wax; and Mr. Dart speaks of it nearly in the words of Weaver, to whose book he refers. 
In the year 1770, our worthy and respectable member, the Honourable Deigns Barrington, whose incessant literary pursuits are confessedly employed for the emolument as well as the edification of the public, stated to the society the above circumstances, together with his sentiments thereon. At the same time, he expressed his ardent wishes that the corpse of Edward the First, as entombed in the Collegiate Church of St. Peter, at Westminster, might be inspected, in order to examine the state of preservation in which it then was; and whether any remains of the composition, supposed to have been used to prevent its decay, were discoverable. His zeal for obtaining such inspection did not, however, rest satisfied with having barely propounded his wishes to the society. He frequently applied to the Reverend Dr. John Thomas, the Dean of Westminster, by means of his learned friend, Dr. Blair, one of the prebendaries of that church, for leave to open the royal tomb. 
The application, extremely delicate in itself, was received by the Dean with that becoming and natural politeness, which renders him peculiarly amiable to all his acquaintance, and attended to by him in a manner which evinced his desire to oblige, so far as might be consistent with the importance of the favour asked, and a strict observance of the duty of his immediate station. After having maturely considered the request, and taken every imaginable precaution for preventing any injury being done, either to the Sarcophagus, or its royal contents, the Dean fixed the second day of this month for its being opened; which was accordingly done, in the presence of himself and two of his prebendaries. 
Built in the form of an altar-table, stands at the west-end of the north-side of the Confessor's Chapel, and at the head of his father, king Henry the Third's monument, from which it is separated by the staircase and entrance, leading from the ambulatory into the chapel. It is in length, from out to out, nine feet seven inches; in height, from the floor of the chapel to the upper edge of the cover-stone, three feet seven inches; and is composed of only five slabs of Purbeck marble, each of them three inches in thickness. Two of these slabs form the sides, two the ends, and one the cover. 
This tomb, which is quite plain, except that the under edge of the cover-stone is chamfered, or sloped off diagonally toward its upper edge, is raised upon a basement of free-stone, which, extending every way near two feet beyond the tomb itself, forms an ascent to it of two steps above the pavement of the chapel. Each of these steps is six inches in height. On the south side, and at each end, it stands open to the chapel. But on the north side it is defended from the ambulatory by a grating of strong ironwork. The smaller upright bars of this grating, terminate at the height of five feet, in a fleur de lis; and the two standards, or end bars, finish in a small bust of an elderly man, with a long visage. A like bust is, also placed in the front part of the frame of the baldoquin, or canopy, built over the tomb. The workmanship of each of these busts is very rude. And yet they have so much the resemblance of the face of king Edward the First, as exhibited on his coins, broad seal, and statue at Caernarvon Castle, that there is not much room to doubt of their having originally been intended to represent that monarch. 
The Inscription. 
Here lies Edward the First, Hammer of the Scots, 1308. Keep the Faith. 
Mentioned by several historians, as being placed on the north side of the tomb, is now greatly defaced, but not so much as to render it altogether illegible. 
The form of the letters in this inscription, and the date of 1308, put, as is supposed, by mistake, instead of 1307, the year in which the king died, are urged as reasons for imagining that the inscription was not placed on the tomb until many years after the king's decease. 
But, on the other hand, it is to be observed, that the letters of the inscription placed round the monument of king Edward the Confessor, which was erected in the reign of king Henry the Third, are exactly similar to those of the inscription here spoken of, those of both inscriptions being manifestly Roman capitals. 
Appearance on opening the tomb. 
On opening the tomb, the cover stone was found to be uncemented to the end and side slabs; and toward the upper edge of the latter were observed some small chasms or holes, which seemed to have been made by the insertion of an iron crow, or some such instrument, and to have been afterwards filled up with fine plaster. The joint between the top and sides, although made extremely close, was also drawn with the same material. As soon as the two ends of the cornerstone were raised upon three courses of blockings prepared for that purpose, there appeared within the tomb a plain coffin of Purbeck marble, laid on a bed of rubble-stone, which had been built up to such a height from the floor, as was necessary for bringing the upper side of the coffin lid into contact with the underside of the covering-stone of the tomb. This coffin, from out to out, is in length six feet seven inches, and in depth one foot four inches. The breadth, at the shoulders, is two feet seven inches; in the middle, two feet three inches; and at the feet, one foot and ten inches. The thickness of each side of this coffin, as also that of its lid, which is cut out of a block of Purbeck marble, is three inches. The lid hath not ever been cemented to the sides of the coffin, but appeared to be so closely and neatly fitted to them, that scarce any dust could penetrate through the crevice. The outside of this coffin is stained with a yellow paint or varnish, and is much smoother than the outside of the tomb, partly owing to its having been less exposed to the air, and partly owing to the composition of the varnish. On lifting up the lid, the royal corpse was found, wrapped up within a large square mantle, of strong, coarse, and thick linen cloth, diapered; of a dull, pale, yellowish brown colour, and waxed on its under side. 
The head and face were entirely covered with a sudarium, or facecloth, of crimson sarcenet, the substance whereof was so much perished, as to have a cobweb-like feel, and the appearance of fine lint. This sudarium was formed into three folds, probably in imitation of the napkin wherewith our Saviour is said to have wiped his face when led to his crucifixion, and which the Romish Church positively assures us, consisted of the like number of folds, on each of which the resemblance of his countenance was then instantly impressed. 
When the folds of the external wrapper were thrown back, and the sudarium removed, the corpse was discovered, richly habited, adorned with ensigns of royalty, and almost entire, notwithstanding the length of time that it had been entombed. Its innermost covering seemed to have a very fine linen cere-cloth, dressed close to every part of the body, and superinduced with such accuracy and exactness, that the fingers and thumbs of both the hands had each of them a separate and distinct envelope of that material. The face, which had a similar covering closely fitted thereto, retained its exact form, although part of the flesh appeared to be somewhat wasted. 
Appearance of the face. 
It was of a dark brown or chocolate colour, approaching to black; and so were the hands and fingers. The chin and lips were entire, but without any beard; and a sinking or dip, between the chin and under lip, was very conspicuous. Both the lips were prominent; the nose short, as if shrunk; but the apertures of the nostrils were visible. There was an unusual fall or cavity, on that part of the bridge of the nose which separates the orbits of the eyes; and some globular substance, possibly the fleshy part of the eyeballs, was moveable in their sockets under the envelope. Below the chin and under-jaw, was lodged a quantity of black dust, which had neither smell nor coherence, but whether the same had been flesh or spices, could not be ascertained. 
One of the joints of the middle finger of the right hand was loose; but those of the left hand were quite perfect. 
Ornaments of the Body, &c. 
Next upon the before-mentioned cere-cloth was a dalmatic, or tunic, of red silk damask; upon which lay a stole of thick white tissue, about three inches in breadth, crossed over the breast, and extending on each side downwards, nearly as low as the wrist, where both ends were brought to cross each other. On this stole were placed, at about the distance of six inches from each other, quatrefoils of filigree work, in metal gilt with gold, elegantly chased in figure, and ornamented with five pieces of beautiful transparent glass or paste, some cut, and others rough, set in raised sockets. The largest of these pieces is in the centre of the quatrefoil; and each of the other four is fixed near to the angle: so that all of them together form the figure of a quincunx. These false stones differ in colour. Some are ruby; others a deep amethyst: some, again, are sapphire; others white; and some a sky-blue. 
The intervals between the quatrefoils on the stole are powdered with an immense quantity of very small white beads, resembling pearls drilled, and tacked down very near each other, so as to compose an embroidery of most elegant form, and not much unlike that which is commonly called the true lovers knot. These beads, or pearls, are also of the same size, and equal to that of the largest pin's head. They are of a shining, silver white hue, but not so pellucid as necklace beads and mock pearls usually are. 
Over these habits is the royal mantle, or pall, of rich crimson satin, fastened on the left shoulder with a magnificent fibula [brooch] of metal gilt with gold, and composed of two joints pinned together by a moveable acus, and resembling a cross garnet hinge. This 'fibula' is four inches in length, richly chased, and ornamented with four pieces of red, and four of blue, transparent paste, similar to those on the quatrefoils, and twenty-two beads, or mock pearls. Each of these pastes and mock pearls is set in a raised and chased socket. The head of the 'acus' [pin] is formed by a long piece of uncut transparent blue paste, shaped like an acorn, and fixed in a chased socket. 
The lower joint of this ???fibula' appears to be connected with the stole, as well as with the chlamys [mantle]; so that the upper parts of each of the lappets, or straps of the stole, being thereby brought nearly into contact with the edge of the royal mantle, those straps form, in appearance, a guard, or border thereto. 
The corpse, from the waist downwards, is covered with a large rich figured piece of cloth of gold, which lies loose over the lower part of the tunic, thighs, legs, and feet, and is tucked down behind the soles of the latter. There did not remain any appearance of gloves; but on the back of each hand, and just below the knuckle of the middle finger, lies a quatrefoil, of the same metal as those on the stole, and like them ornamented with five pieces of transparent paste; with this difference, however, that the centrepiece in each quatrefoil is larger, and seemingly of a more beautiful blue, than those on any of the quatrefoils on the stole. 
Between the two forefingers, and the thumb of the right hand, the King holds a sceptre, with the cross made of copper-gilt. This sceptre is two feet six inches in length, and of most elegant workmanship. Its upper part extends unto, and rests on, the king's right shoulder. 
Between the two forefingers and the thumb of his left hand, he holds the rod, or sceptre, with the dove, which, passing over his left shoulder, reaches up as high as his ear. This rod is five feet and half an inch in length. The stalk is divided into two equal parts by a knob fillet, and at its bottom is flat ferule [rod]. 
The top of the stalk terminates in three bouquets, or tiers of oak leaves, of green enamel, protrude from the background, [in alto-relievo] each bouquet diminishing in breadth as they approach toward the summit of the sceptre, whereon stands a ball, or mound, surmounted by the figure of a dove, with its wings closed, and made of white enamel. 
On the head of the corpse, which lies within a recess hollowed out of the stone coffin, and properly shaped for its reception, is an open crown, or fillet of tin, or latin [thin copper-zinc alloy], charged on its upper edge with trefoils, and gilt with gold, but evidently of inferior workmanship, in all respects, to that of the sceptre and quatrefoils. 
The shape and form of the crown, sceptre, and fibula, and the manner in which the latter is fixed to the mantle, or chlamys, exactly correspond with the representation of those on the broad seal of that king, as exhibited by Sandiford, in his genealogical history of the kings and queens in England. 

On a careful inspection of the fingers on both hands, no ring could be discovered. However, as it cannot be supposed that the corpse was deposited without that usual attendant ensign of royalty, we may with great probability conjecture, that, on the shrinking of the fingers, which must have been the consequence of length of time, and the operation of the antiseptics applied to them, the royal ring had slipped off from the finger, and buried in some, parts of the robes, none of which were disturbed in order to search for it. 
The feet, with their toes, soles, and heels, seemed to be perfectly entire; but whether they have sandals on them, or not, is uncertain, as the cloth tucked over them was not removed. 
On measuring the body by a rod, graduated into inches, divided into quarters, it appeared to be exactly six feet and two inches in length. So that, although we may, with some degree of propriety, adapt the ideas of those historians who tell us, that the king was taller than the generality of men; yet we can no longer credit those who assert, that he was taller by the head than any other man of his time. How far the appellation of Longshanks, usually given to him, was properly applicable, cannot be ascertained, since the length of the tibi?? could not be truly measured, and compared with that of the femora, without removing the vestments, and thereby incurring a risk of doing injury to the corpse. 
It hath been conjectured, that he obtained the nick name of Longshanks, from a manifest disproportion in the length of his thighs and legs, to that of his body. But, on inspection of the corpse, so far as could be done without removing the robes, no such disproportion was observable. Perhaps, therefore, we may not deviate from truth, should we suppose, with Mr. Sandiford, that such appellation was given to him on account of the height of his stature, and not from any extravagant length either of his thighs or legs. 
There is still preserved, in Westminster Abbey, among the figures that compose what is called the ragged regiment, the effigy, which, according to the custom of ancient times, lay upon Edward the First's coffin, during the funeral procession and exequies; and which figure, in all likelihood, was afterwards placed on his tomb, and there continued a considerable time: for Peter Langtoft, who did not survive that monarch above six years, speaking of his death and burial, says, 
From Waltham before-said to Westminster they him brought, 
Besides his father he is laid, in a tomb well wrought, 
Of marble is the stone, and putrid there he lies. 
The length of the legs in this figure, measuring from the sole of the foot to the cap of the knee, is twenty-one inches and half. No positive conclusion, however, can be fairly drawn from thence, as to what was the exact stature of King Edward, or as, to the proportion which the length of his legs bore to that of the whole, or any particular part of his body; because this figure was certainly made taller than the real stature of the King, as is evident, not only from the before-mentioned measure taken of the royal corpse, but from the cavity of the stone coffin, which is not capable of receiving a body six feet five inches in length. Probably the figure-maker, according to the practice of those times, applying his attention principally to the making a perfect resemblance of the features and visage of the defunct, neglected to model and form the figure to the exact and real height of Edward's stature. 
The apparelling the corpse of the monarch in his royal vestments, accompanied with the ensigns of regality, as before described, is not, on any account, to be considered as a peculiar mark of respect paid to him in contradistinction to preceding kings, but as being done merely in conformity to usual and ancient custom. 
He was, on this occasion, habited in the same manner that the corpses of all other kings, his predecessors, had been dressed, in order to their sepulture: and similar, except in some few particulars only, to a mode, or regulation, established by authority, 'On the Exequies of Kings [in the Royal Book, Liber Regalis]. 

