Those stones being removed, a body was found lying in the vault, enclosed in lead, with an embroidered linen cloth over it, much decayed. - The lead appeared quite entire, except at the feet, and at one of the knees, where it was decayed, through which the bones of a skeleton appeared; and over the Head the lead was formed into the shape of a rude crown. Mr Burn having luckily been on the spot at the time, prevented any further investigation, and ordered the spot to be carefully watched till your Lordships orders should be given as to any farther investigation; and immediate notice having been sent to me of the discovery, I was directed by your Lordships to order the Sheriff to secure the vault from all further inspection, until a more complete investigation of this interesting spot could take place; which, from its situation, there could be no doubt must have been the Tomb of King Robert Bruce, Directions were accordingly given through the Sheriff to secure it in every possible way from idle curiosity; and particularly, to place large stones upon the top of the vault in place of those which had been removed, and to fix them together with strong iron bars. Directions were at the same time given to secure the other six tombs on the north side in a similar manner; and all these orders were immediately executed.
Your Lordships afterwards resolved, that so soon as the walls of the church should be completed, and the whole roofed in, an accurate investigation at the sight of, and with the assistance of gentlemen of science and knowledge of such subjects, should take place, in order to ascertain the exact situation of this ancient vault, and of the Royal remains that were deposited in it.
Accordingly, upon the 5th November 1819, the new building being in a state of forwardness, I went to Dunfermline, agreeably to your Lordships directions, to prepare for the opening and inspection of
the vault, with the assistance of Mr Burn, who had previously made the necessary arrangements for the occasion.
We proceeded to the church at 9 o'clock in the morning, and having removed the large stones which
had been placed over the vault in 1818, we laid the whole open; and after carefully covering it over with boards, waited the arrival of the Lord Chief Baron and Mr Baron Clerk Rattray; Mr Baron Adam having been prevented by indisposition from attending; which was deeply regretted, as he had
taken a great interest in the matter, and much trouble in making the previous arrangements for this interesting investigation.
Their Lordships arrived at 11 o'clock, when, with the Magistrates, a considerable number of the heritors and gentlemen of the county, and of the principal inhabitants of the town of Dunfermline, Dr Gregory, his Majesty's first physician for Scotland, Dr Munro, the professor of anatomy in the University of Edinburgh, and other gentlemen of science, we proceeded to the examination of the vault. The boards previously laid over the vault being removed, it was minutely examined. The vault was formed of regular built masonry, of a soft gritty sand-stone, perfectly smooth, each stone about a foot square, and having a particular and distinct mark or figure cut upon its surface, supposed to be the private mark of the operative mason who had executed the work; the vault was seven feet long, twenty-two and one half inches in breadth, and eighteen inches in depth, originally covered with the large flat stones, with the iron rings which had been removed in 1818. The bottom was paved with large stones of similar construction with the sides; but in which there was a fracture or opening through the whole length of about two inches in breadth. This vault or grave was situated in a larger vault of an oblong form, with a circular end towards the east, also built of regular masonry; but the west end I was not able to trace minutely, though I am disposed to think it was of a square form.
In the smaller vault, or grave, a human skeleton was found, wrapped up in lead, but in a state of greater decay than it was represented to have been at the first opening of the vault in February 1818, as there were several holes in the lead, through which the bones of the skeleton were quite apparent, of a- brownish colour; - at the bottom there was a considerable quantity of rubbish, to the depth of about two or three inches, which, upon examination, was found to consist of the remains of a wooden coffin, apparently of oak, in a very damp state: - None of the pieces of wood were larger than two or three inches, and quite decayed and soft. I carefully examined the whole of this rubbish, and particularly under the hands, in expectation of being able to discover any rings that might have been upon the fingers, but without success, having only found two or three iron nails with very broad heads which had certainly been in the wooden coffin. The building on the south side of the vault was carefully taken down, in order to enable us to thrust under the body and wrapper of lead, a wooden board of 18 inches in breadth, and made very thin at the edge, by which the whole was raised up, disturbing the skeleton as little as possible, and was carefully placed upon the edge of the vault, in order to enable us to inspect it more minutely. The lead consisted of two separate and distinct coverings, which had been wrapped round the body like a sear-cloth, each about the eighth of an inch thick; the upper coat of lead was much decayed and corroded, but the inner one was in better preservation. Both coats were broken in many places, and were much depressed over the abdomen. That part of it over the head was so firm and entire, that we were obliged to saw it off to get at the skull, but there were no remains of the rude crown which had been observed at the first opening, it having probably been carried off at that time by some of the spectators.
The whole being removed from over the body by folding it back, the skull was taken up, and found
in a most perfect state, the os hyoides was entire, and several cartilages of the larynx were visible,
from having, it is supposed, been ossified; but all the other cartilages of the body, the ligaments, tendons, and other softer parts were entirely gone. I found a considerable quantity of water, upon thrusting my finger into the foramen magnum, arising from the dampness of the place. The whole teeth in the under jaw were entire and, in their places,, but there were four or five in the upper jaw wanting, with a considerable fracture of the jaw-bone in front, evidently occasioned by a blow, which the King is supposed to have received in one of those many extraordinary adventures which he was exposed in the early part of his life. The skull, after being prepared, was given to Mr Scholar, an artist of talent brought for the purpose, who proceeded to make a cast of it in Paris plaster, which he executed with great skill, as your Lordships will perceive upon examining it.
The formation of this skull has many peculiarities, which are explained in some remarks in the Appendix by an able anatomist. We then proceeded to examine the other bones of the skeleton, which we found in a perfect state, in their natural position; one of the vertebrae only being separated from the corresponding one about the distance of an inch. The whole were minutely examined, and found in an entire and perfect state; and being accurately measured, the proportions were as in the annexed plate, No. 2, from which it appears pretty clearly, that King Robert was a man of about 5 feet 11 inches to 6 feet in stature. But the most remarkable circumstance which we
observed upon examining the skeleton, was the state of the sternum, which we found had been sawed asunder longitudinally from top to bottom, - the most satisfactory evidence that it was the body of King Robert Bruce; as it proved beyond a doubt that it had taken place previous to his interment, in order to get at the heart, which, as already mentioned, he had directed to be carried by Douglas to the Holy Land, and which the ignorance of the anatomists of those days had made them perform, in order to enable them to comply with their Sovereign's last commands.
Upon the lead we found the fragments of the embroidered linen cloth already mentioned, which was now entirely reduced to fragments of not more than a few inches in size, and so decayed that it could hardly be touched without mouldering into dust; it had apparently been thrown loosely over the lead as a shroud, after the body had been deposited in the coffin. I took some of these fragments out, and have preserved them, by placing them betwixt two pieces of glass, closely secured at the edges, which will give some faint idea of what the cloth once was. This cloth or shroud was evidently of fine linen, interwoven with threads of gold, and not of silk; as has been ascertained from burning a small fragment of it, which had not the slightest smell of burnt silk, or any other animal substance, and most probably was of the same kind of cloth which, in our old records, is called Toldour, Toldore, and Twoldere, most likely, as Dr Jameson remarks, a corruption of French toil d'or, or cloth of gold. From the state of this cloth, and indeed of the lead, it is clear, that a very rapid decay of these had arisen from the time it was first opened in 1818,
though it is not likely that any change had taken place on the skeleton.
After this minute examination, the skeleton was carefully wrapped up again in the lead covering, all the bones being placed in their natural position, and ready to be deposited in a large leaden coffin which had been prepared to receive it. This coffin was formed of strong sheet lead of half an inch thick, seven feet long, two feet five inches broad, and two feet in depth, and was placed close by the vault. Into this coffin was first poured melted pitch, to the depth of about four inches, and then the following articles were deposited:
Barbour's Life of Bruce, in black letter, 4to. edition of 1714, given for the purpose by the
Rev. Dr Jamieson.
Lord Haile's Annals of Scotland, 2 vols. 8vo. Kerr's History of the Reign of King Robert, 2 vols. 8vo. 1811.
The History of Dunfermline, by the Rev. John
4. One Shilling, 1816.
5. One ditto, 1819.
6. One ditto, 1787.
7. One Sixpence, 1787.
8. One ditto, 1816.
9. One ditto, 1819.
The coins were first put into a small copper box, and then enclosed in one of lead; and all the other
articles were enclosed in leaden boxes closely secured.
The skeleton was then placed upon the top of the leaden coffin, resting upon the wooden board by
which it had been raised; and in order to gratify the curiosity of an immense crowd of people, who
were assembled on the outside of the church, the south and north doors of the church were thrown
open, and the people were allowed to enter by the south door, passing along the side of the vault, and retiring by the north; which they did in the most decent and orderly manner. As soon as the public curiosity was gratified, the vault was levelled to the floor, which was also taken up and laid level, and upon the top of it was placed a bed of bricks laid in mortar, on which, and in the exact situation in which the skeleton was found, the leaden coffin was placed, and the body carefully deposited in it. It was then filled up within two inches of the top with the melted pitch, and the top soldered on; upon which was cast, in raised letters, the following inscription, denoting the year of the King's death, and of his re-interment.
KING ROBERT BRUCE. 1329. 1819.
The sides of the vault were then built up with bricks, the whole arched over, and a strong stone wall, 18 inches thick, was built all-round the brick arch. In the course of clearing out the rubbish of the
large outer vault, the workmen came upon a small leaden box, 2 feet 6 inches in length, 9 inches in
breadth, and 5 inches in depth, lying about 11 feet 6 inches distant from the east end of the outer vault, in a north-east direction from the tomb; this we carefully examined, and found in it, a considerable quantity of a substance resembling lime, and a small substance, from 6 to 8 inches in length, and 4 inches in breadth, and about half an inch thick, of a tuff and firm texture, apparently of animal substance; it was most probably the bowels of some person of consideration, who had been buried in the church; but not likely those of King Robert, as it was found at so great a distance from his tomb, and not even within the outer vault already described; but it was judged proper to deposit it in the large leaden coffin, along with the skeleton.
I have thus endeavoured to describe, perhaps with too great minuteness, the circumstances attending the discovery of the tomb of King Robert Bruce ; from which it does not appear that any doubt can exist, that they were the remains of that illustrious Prince which were then discovered; but a circumstance afterwards occurred, which puts the matter beyond the possibility of doubt.
The workmen, in the course of their operations, a few days afterwards, (10th November,) found a
plate of copper, 5 inches in length, and 4 in breadth, and about one-eighth of an inch in thickness, with holes at each corner for fixing it on the coffin, bearing this inscription, "Robertus Scotorum Rex," the letters resemble those on the coins of this King. A cross is placed under the inscription, with a mullet or star in each angle, with the crown, precisely of the form in those coins. It was found among the rubbish which had been removed on the 5th, close to the vault on the east side, and most probably had been adhering to one of the stones of the vault, and had thus escaped our notice at the time.
