We have, for example, contemporary accounts of what took place at Canterbury after the fires both of 1067 and of 1174, and during the reconstruction that followed in each case. After the earlier of those fires, as we are informed by Edmer the Singer, “There was erected over the resting-place of the blessed man (Archbishop Dunstan) a house of small magnitude;
and in this were performed daily over his holy body, masses together with the other services.
Three years later, when Lanfranc came to Canterbury, we are told that he first built the necessary offices for the convent, while As for the church, which the aforesaid fire, combined with its age, had rendered completely unserviceable, he set about to destroy it utterly, and erect a more
noble one. And in the space of seven years, he raised this new church from the very foundations, and rendered it nearly perfect. But before the work began, he commanded that the bodies of the saints, which were buried in the eastern part of the church, should be removed to the western part, where the oratory of the blessed Virgin Mary stood. Wherefore, after a three days fast, the bodies of those most precious priests of the Lord, Dunstan and Elphege, were raised, and in presence of an innumerable multitude, conveyed to their destined place of interment, and there decently buried. To which I, Edmer, can bear witness, for I was then a boy at the school.
But, in process of time, as the new work of the commenced church proceeded, it became necessary to take down the remainder of the old work, where the bodies of the saints just mentioned
were deposited. Having prepared, therefore, the refectory of the brethren for the celebration of the Divine Service, we all proceeded thither from the old church in festal procession, bearing
with honour and reverence our glorious and sweet fathers, Dunstan and Elphege.
When the high Altar of the old church was taken down, the relics of the blessed Wilfrid were found, and placed in a coffer (scrinium); but after some years, the brethren became of opinion that
they ought to have a more permanent resting-place, and, accordingly, a sepulchre was prepared for them, on the north side of an altar, in which they were reverently enclosed, on the fourth idus
of October. Moreover, when the other altars were destroyed, all the holy places, which the wisdom of the ancient fathers had constructed within them, were discovered; to the truth of which I can bear a faithful testimony, seeing that I was myself an eye-witness of all that was done.
After a few years, the bodies of the pontiffs, Cuthbert, Bregwin, and their successors, were brought into the newly-founded church, and placed in the north part, upon a vault, each in a separate
wooden coffin, and there, daily, the mystery of the Sacrifice of Salvation was celebrated."
Of the fire of 1174 and the subsequent reconstruction of the choir by William of Sens and William the Englishman, we have a graphic account by Gervase, in which we are informed that the bodies of the saints were again moved into temporary resting places in the nave, where an altar and station were put together. From this temporary chapel they were finally removed in the
sixth year after the fire, and as soon as the new choir was sufficiently advanced to receive them.
