The work of restoring the south transept and adjoining aisles [St Giles Cathedral] on the west, involved some excavations by which it was hoped a discovery would be made of certain burial vaults that were believed to be in this part of the building. A search for these vaults took place on the 10th April 1879. Only one vault was discovered. It was that in which the Regent Murray was entombed, 1569-70. It was situated close to the west wall of the transept. The vault measured about sixteen feet in length from north to south, and was little more than three feet in width. The search was to a certain extent disappointing. No coffin of any kind could be found containing the remains of the
illustrious Regent. Three leaden coffins were discovered in a bad condition. The most perfect of these coffins, as seen by the arms and inscriptions, contained the remains of Alexander, fourth Earl of Galloway, born 1670, died 1690. The other two leaden coffins bore neither arms nor inscriptions, and seemed to pertain to persons of a slight figure. It was the opinion of a medical authority present that the remains in one of the coffins were those of a young man; and that the remains in the other were those of a female of middle age. Near these leaden coffins was found a leaden plate, bearing the engraved inscription, Francis Stuart, Esq., died at Rheims in France, 7th Oct. 1768, Aged 22. The plate had probably been on a wooden coffin that lay in fragments, and in which the leaden coffin had been placed. The Francis Stuart referred to was a son of the Hon. Francis Stuart of Pittendriech, third son of Francis, sixth Earl of Moray.
The burial vault of the Regent, as we learn by a notice in the Edinburgh newspapers, under date January 23, 1830, had been disturbed by the alterations then going on, and this may
account for the absence of any coffin recognisable as that pertaining to the Regent. To all appearance, a coffin of some kind had been emptied of its contents, which now lay as a
confused heap of bones. A skull picked up from the heap was viewed with much respect. Massive, and with craniological indications of mental superiority, it was believed to be that of the Regent Murray. Such, at least, was our own belief, and that of one or two other persons present. The skull was carefully replaced in the heap of bones alongside the leaden coffins, and to prevent intrusion, the vault was immediately built up.
Attempts to find other burial vaults during the excavations of 1879 proved unsuccessful. On lifting the pavement of the crypt eastward from the Regent's tomb, within the compass of the south transept, there were seen two enclosures formed by dwarf walls that might at one time have been vaults. They were found to contain rubbish, with which a few bones of no significance were mingled. The enclosure farthest to the east was probably the vault in which the body of John, fourth Earl
of Idol, was entombed, 1579. Descending by a few steps to the vault underneath the
Chapman Aisle, a rigorous search was now made for the remains of the Marquis of Montrose, which had undoubtedly been entombed here in 1661. No coffin nor any fragment of
coffin could be discovered. Only some small pieces of bones were picked up from the soil. These we placed in a small box, and reverently deposited it on the spot where the remains of the Marquis had been ceremoniously interred. The floor of the vault was then laid with pavement, in which was inserted a marble tablet with the inscription, 'MONTROSE, 1661.
The trenchings and the excavations that took place over the floor of the southern aisles need not be particularly described. The quantity of bones dug up was immense, the whole probably
amounting to five tons in weight. After examination, the whole were placed in boxes, and removed to Greyfriars Churchyard for interment. It was unsatisfactory to be driven to the conclusion, that the vaults in which a number of distinguished personages were entombed, had been rifled of the leaden coffins with their contents in the course of alterations on this part of
the building, 1829 to 1833, at which time the ancient and historical tomb of the Earl of Murray was destroyed. The strange disappearance of the remains of illustrious dead from the spot in which by history and tradition they are said to have been placed, raises a painful reflection regarding the indifference to matters of this kind so lately as half a century ago. Only in 1879 did the disappearance of the remains become known.
