

1672: The "Clergy" and Magistrates of Aberdeen, further licensed against this people, procure the demolition of the walls of their burial ground, and the disinterment of their dead - Letter of William Dewsbury - John Swintoune and Robert Barclay imprisoned at Montrose together with some Friends at that place, for holding a meeting: their Address to the Magistrates 1633: Andrew Jeffrey convinced, and several more - the Provost and Magistrates of Aberdeen strenuously importune the King's Council against the "Quakers" - they are examined and fined - Hugh Neilson's disappointment of the fines, by a proclamation of the Government -- death of Alexander Jeffrey - his wife's convincement and death.
In a preceding page, allusion was made to the defective state of moral and religious feeling, so variously developed in the history of the times now under notice. In connexion with this subject, one sad illustration is here to be introduced, of the length to which men may be carried, when they release themselves from the obligations of Christianity and a civilized state.
About the beginning of the year 1672, several persons both in Aberdeen and its vicinity, withdrawing from the religion established by law, the public preachers in the city were so incensed as to procure, by their influence with the magistrates, the pulling down and demolishing the walls of a burial-ground, which the people called Quakers had purchased with their own money, and wherein a child of Thomas Milne had been a few days before interred. The body of this child, after three days interment, was, by order of the provost and bailies, taken out of the ground, and carried to a village called Fut, or Foot of Dee, where they had a grave made for it. But a rumour being raised by some malicious persons, as if Friends had, to deceive the magistrates, taken out the child's body, and filled the coffin with somewhat else, they ordered the coffin to be broken open ; in doing which the corpse was injured, and actually was made to bleed though so long dead. In the same year in which this piece of wanton inhumanity was acted, an unusual mortality is stated to have taken place among children of that place, such as had not occurred in the memory of any person then resident there. The very next day after the raising of the body of the child, it so happened, that John Scott, one of magistrates who had been the most active instrument in this affair, had his own favourite grandchild unintentionally killed by the servant, which occasioned much outcry of distress in that family. Going on in his usual course of wickedness, among similar acts, often causing the walls of the burial-place and premises to be pulled down, &c. he was, shortly after, suspended in his career by a fall which fractured his leg. They, nevertheless, continued to remove every corpse that was interred in the same ground; nor did the barbarous practice cease, till a representation being made to the King's Council, a secret check was given them, and this more than ordinary inhumanity put a stop to. 


