
Elizabeth, King Robert Bruce's second Queen, and daughter to the Earl of Ulster in Ireland, died a short time before her husband, in the year 1327, while he was engaged in the siege of Norham Castle; and was likewise interred at Dunfermline, “  Anno Domini 1327, septimo kalendas Novembris, obiit Domina Elizabeth regina, mater regis David, et sepulta est in choro de Dunfermeling, juxta regem Robertum sponsum suum. ['In the year of the Lord 1327, on the seven kalends of November, Lady Queen Elizabeth, mother of King David, died and was buried in the choir in Dunfermline next to her husband King Robert'].” 
Of this Princess, history has recorded so little, that we can only presume that her life was spent without blame; greater part of it was consumed in a long captivity in England, where she appears to have been treated with a liberality and attention hardly reconcilable with the manners of the age.
Having thus shown from history, that many of the Sovereigns of Scotland had been interred in the church of Dunfermline; it is rather surprising that in later times the curiosity of antiquarians should not have been excited to know whether any of the Royal remains existed in those repositories where they were said to have been entombed: And it was not till the year 1807, that any attempt was made to ascertain this, when Mr Graham Dalyell, advocate, a gentleman well qualified for making such an investigation, undertook it: And in his interesting publication on the subject, he observes, “It was lately considered peculiarly interesting, to ascertain whether any relics of the tombs or repositories of the Royal remains, might still be extant.
 Therefore, having previously obtained the acquiescence of those who could have opposed the research, the middle stone of the west row, being the largest, was removed early on the morning of the 28th of July 1807. An early hour was preferred, on purpose to prevent interruption; for the walls surrounding the psalter churchyard were insufficient to guard against the intrusive curiosity naturally expected on the occasion. The earth immediately below the surface, and even to the depth of two or three feet, had the appearance of having been dug before, though perhaps at a remote period; and nothing whatever was found among it, excepting a few human bones, brittle and rotten. Under this, however, about four or five feet from the surface, a coffin, rudely built of small irregular pieces of sandstone, along with a scanty portion of lime, and covered in the same manner with similar materials, was found, containing the skeleton of a full-grown person, pretty entire. Its position was not directly below the large stone, but one half of the length further west. It lay among soft humid clay, completely filling the coffin, from which the bones had imbibed so much moisture, that, on lifting a broken one, the water poured from the lower end as on squeezing a sponge. The head, or upper part of the coffin, towards the west, was contracted into narrow compass, just admitting the skull, which was quite fresh, and the teeth sound.
This coffin had certainly never been opened, and I am inclined to ascribe its structure to a more ancient date than the decease of the Kings whose bodies are said to be deposited in the abbey; for I do not conceive that any of them are contained in it. All the bones were returned to their original situation, and the pieces composing the top of the coffin put over them. The morning, by this time, being far advanced, the whole excavation was filled up, and the covering replaced, which operation, as well as removing it, was a matter of considerable difficulty, as it is above nine feet long, more than one half as broad, and several inches thick." 
From this investigation, however, little information on the subject appears to have been obtained: But in the year 1817, the parish church, occupying, as I have already mentioned, the nave of the ancient cathedral, having become ruinous and unsuitable for a place of worship. The heritors of the
parish of Dunfermline, and the Magistrates of the Burgh, came to the resolution of building an entire
new church, and procured from Mr Burn, architect, of this city, a plan highly creditable to his talents, and displaying most correct taste in Gothic architecture. The structure is remarkable for its simplicity; and though not loaded with unnecessary ornaments, will be executed for £8,700. An elevation of the whole building is annexed.
By this plan it was proposed to keep up the old church, or nave, and add to it an entire new church on the east, occupying nearly the whole space of the ancient cathedral, leaving the old part (after removing the seating in it) to remain as the entry or approach to the new church, which will have a singularly grand effect. In the execution of this plan, however, it was discovered, that it would interfere with the spot where the ancient Kings had been buried, on the north side of the cathedral: - and the Magistrates, in the month of January 1818, applied to your Lordships for permission to remove these remains to another part of the churchyard, near to the tomb of Malcolm and Queen Margaret. But your Lordships, conceiving this to be improper, refused your consent, and gave strict injunctions that this spot should not be disturbed by any part of the buildings of the new church.
In order to get quit of this difficulty, the heritors at once acceded to a proposal to extend the plan, and found the north wall beyond the limits of this spot, so as to include it in the new building. And upon the 14th February 1818, I went to Dunfermline, along with Baron Adam, (Lord Chief Commissioner,) and had a communication with the Magistrates and heritors, when it was finally agreed that this should be done. It has accordingly since been executed, and the spot is now enclosed, and forms the north end of the transept of the new church, leaving the burial-place of the ancient Kings undisturbed. And this may be still more completely accomplished, by appropriating this spot for the seat or gallery which His Majesty is entitled to have in the church, which may be fitted up in a manner not to interfere with, but to give decoration to these remains of our ancient Monarchs, and to allow them to continue in the same state in which they have been for ages.
Mr Burn, in the course of his preparations for the building of the new church, has been enabled to make out a very interesting ground plan of the ancient cathedral, taken from the remains of the old walls which he discovered in the course of the work, and a copy of which he has obligingly furnished me with, by which the exact situation of the ancient tombs is better explained than by any description, and to which I beg to refer.
In the progress of these operations, the workmen, on the 17th February 1818, came by accident upon a vault, in a line with the very centre of the ancient cathedral, which was covered with two large flat stones, of different sizes; the one on the west forming the head stone of the vault, which measured in breadth 28 1/2 inches, and in length 18 inches, the lower one six feet in length, and 28 1/2 inches in breadth. The head stone was entire, but the lower one was fractured into several pieces, probably by the fall of the ruins of the cathedral.
In the lower one, there were six iron rings, or rather handles, which had been fixed in with lead. The stones are of a soft gritty sandstone, and very easily fractured. Those stones being removed, a body was found lying in the vault, enclosed in lead, with an embroidered linen cloth over it, much decayed. The lead appeared quite entire, except at the feet, and at one of the knees, where it was decayed, through which the bones of a skeleton appeared; and over the Head the lead was formed into the shape of a rude crown. Mr Burn having luckily been on the spot at the time, prevented any further investigation, and ordered the spot to be carefully watched till your Lordships orders should be given as to any farther investigation; and immediate notice having been sent to me of the discovery, I was directed by your Lordships to order the Sheriff to secure the vault from all further inspection, until a more complete investigation of this interesting spot could take place; which, from its situation, there could be no doubt must have been the Tomb of King Robert Bruce. Directions were accordingly given through the Sheriff to secure it in every possible way from idle curiosity; and particularly, to place large stones upon the top of the vault in place of those which had been removed, and to fix them together with strong iron bars. Directions were at the same time given to secure the other six tombs on the north side in a similar manner; and all these orders were immediately executed.
Your Lordships afterwards resolved, that so soon as the walls of the church should be completed, and the whole roofed in, an accurate investigation at the sight of, and with the assistance of gentlemen of science and knowledge of such subjects, should take place, in order to ascertain the exact situation of this ancient vault, and of the Royal remains that were deposited in it.
Accordingly, upon the 5th November 1819, the new building being in a state of forwardness, I went to Dunfermline, agreeably to your Lordships directions, to prepare for the opening and inspection of the vault, with the assistance of Mr Burn, who had previously made the necessary arrangements for the occasion.
We proceeded to the church at 9 o'clock in the morning, and having removed the large stones which had been placed over the vault in 1818, we laid the whole open; and after carefully covering it over with boards, waited the arrival of the Lord Chief Baron and Mr Baron Clerk Rattray ; Mr Baron Adam having been prevented by indisposition from attending ; which was deeply regretted, as he had taken a great interest in the matter, and much trouble in making the previous arrangements for this interesting investigation. Their Lordships arrived at 11 o'clock, when, with the Magistrates, a considerable number of the heritors and gentlemen of the county, and of the principal inhabitants of the town of Dunfermline, Dr Gregory, his Majesty's first physician for Scotland, Dr Munro, the professor of anatomy in the University of Edinburgh, and other gentlemen of science, we proceeded to the examination of the vault. The boards previously laid over the vault being removed, it was minutely examined. The vault was formed of regular built masonry, of a soft gritty sand-stone, perfectly smooth, each stone about a foot square, and having a particular and distinct mark or figure cut upon its surface, supposed to be the private mark of the operative mason who had executed the work; the vault was seven feet long, twenty-two and one half inches in breadth, and eighteen inches in depth, originally covered with the large flat stones, with the iron rings which had been removed in 1818. The bottom was paved with large stones of similar construction with the sides; but in which there was a fracture or opening through the whole length of about two inches in breadth. This vault or grave was situated in a larger vault of an oblong form, with a circular end towards the east, also built of regular masonry; but the west end I was not able to trace minutely, though I am disposed to think it was of a square form.
In the smaller vault, or grave, a human skeleton was found, wrapped up in lead, but in a state of greater decay than it was represented to have been at the first opening of the vault in February 1818, as there were several holes in the lead, through which the bones of the skeleton were quite apparent, of a brownish colour; - at the bottom there was a considerable quantity of rubbish, to the depth of about two or three inches, which, upon examination, was found to consist of the remains of a wooden coffin, apparently of oak, in a very damp state: - None of the pieces of wood were larger than two or three inches, and quite decayed and soft. I carefully examined the whole of this rubbish, and particularly under the hands, in expectation of being able to discover any rings that might have been upon the fingers, but without success, having only found two or three iron nails with very broad heads which had certainly been in the wooden coffin. The building on the south side of the vault was carefully taken down, in order to enable us to thrust under the body and wrapper of lead, a wooden board of 18 inches in breadth, and made very thin at the edge, by which the whole was raised up, disturbing the skeleton as little as possible, and was carefully placed upon the edge of the vault, in order to enable us to inspect it more minutely. The lead consisted of two separate and distinct coverings, which had been wrapped round the body like a sear-cloth, each about the eighth of an inch thick; the upper coat of lead was much decayed and corroded, but the inner one was in better preservation. Both coats were broken in many places and were much depressed over the abdomen. That part of it over the head was so firm and entire, that we were obliged to saw it off to get at the skull, but there were no remains of the rude crown which had been observed at the first opening, it having probably been carried off at that time by some of the spectators. The whole being removed from over the body by folding it back, the skull was taken up, and found in a most perfect state, the os hyoides was entire, and several cartilages of the larynx were visible, from having, it is supposed, been ossified; but all the other cartilages of the body, the ligaments, tendons, and other softer parts were entirely gone. I found a considerable quantity of water, upon thrusting my finger into the foramen magnum, arising from the dampness of the place. The whole teeth in the under jaw were entire and in their places, but there were four or five in the upper jaw wanting, with a considerable fracture of the jaw-bone in front, evidently occasioned by a blow, which the King is supposed to have received in one of those many extraordinary adventures to which he was exposed in the early part of his life. The skull, after being prepared, was given to Mr Scholar, an artist of talent brought for the purpose, who proceeded to make a cast of it in Paris plaster, which he executed with great skill, as your Lordships will perceive upon examining it.
The formation of this skull has many peculiarities, which are explained in some remarks in the Appendix by an able anatomist. We then proceeded to examine the other bones of the skeleton, which we found in a perfect state, in their natural position; one of the vertebræ only being separated from the corresponding one about the distance of an inch. The whole were minutely examined, and found in an entire and perfect state; and being accurately measured, the proportions were as in the annexed plate, No. 2, from which it appears pretty clearly, that King Robert was a man of about 5 feet 11 inches to 6 feet in stature. But the most remarkable circumstance which we observed upon examining the skeleton, was the state of the sternum, which we found had been sawed asunder longitudinally from top to bottom, - the most satisfactory evidence that it was the body of King Robert Bruce; as it proved beyond a doubt that it had taken place previous to his interment, in order to get at the heart, which, as already mentioned, he had directed to be carried by Douglas to the Holy Land, and which the ignorance of the anatomists of those days had made them perform, in order to enable them to comply with their Sovereign's last commands.
Upon the lead we found the fragments of the embroidered linen cloth already mentioned, which was now entirely reduced to fragments of not more than a few inches in size, and so decayed that it could hardly be touched without mouldering into dust; it had apparently been thrown loosely over the lead as a shroud, after the body had been deposited in the coffin. I took some of these fragments out, and have preserved them, by placing them betwixt two pieces of glass, closely secured at the edges, which will give some faint idea of what the cloth once was. This cloth or shroud was evidently of fine linen, interwoven with threads of gold, and not of silk; as has been ascertained from burning a small fragment of it, which had not the slightest smell of burnt sílk, or any other animal substance, and most probably was of the same kind of cloth which, in our old records, is called Toldour, Toldore, and Twoldere, most likely, as Dr Jameson remarks, a corruption of French toil d'or, or cloth of gold. From the state of this cloth, and indeed of the lead, it is clear, that a very rapid decay of these had arisen from the time it was first opened in 1818, though it is not likely that any change had taken place on the skeleton.
After this minute examination, the skeleton was carefully wrapped up again in the lead covering, all the bones being placed in their natural position, and ready to be deposited in a large leaden coffin which had been prepared to receive it. This coffin was formed of strong sheet lead of half an inch thick, seven feet long, two feet five inches broad, and two feet in depth, and was placed close by the vault. Into this coffin was first poured melted pitch, to the depth of about four inches, and then the following articles were deposited:
Barbour's Life of Bruce, in black letter, 4to. edition of 1714, given for the purpose by the
Rev. Dr Jamieson.
Lord Haile's Annals of Scotland, 2 vols. 8vo.
Kerr's History of the Reign of King Robert,
2 vols. 8vo. 1811.
The History of Dunfermline, by the Rev. John
Fern, 8vo. 1815.
The Edinburgh Almanac and Directory for 1819, with a variety of the Edinburgh Newspapers of the day. Together with the following Coins, of the Reign of His Majesty King George the Third.
GOLD.
1. One Guinea, 1798.
2. One Half do. 1791.
3. One do. do. 1802.
4. One Sovereign, 1817.
5. One Half do. 1817.
6. One Seven Shilling piece, 1810.
7. One Quarter Guinea.
SILVER.
1. One Crown Piece, 1819.
2. One Half Crown, 1816.
3. One do. do. 1819.
4. One Shilling, 1816.
5. One ditto, 1819.
6. One ditto, 1787.
7. One Sixpence, 1787.
8. One ditto, 1816.
9. One ditto, 1819.
The coins were first put into a small copper box, and then enclosed in one of lead; and all the other articles were enclosed in leaden boxes closely secured.

The skeleton was then placed upon the top of the leaden coffin, resting upon the wooden board by which it had been raised; and in order to gratify the curiosity of an immense crowd of people, who were assembled on the outside of the church, the south and north doors of the church were thrown open, and the people were allowed to enter by the south door, passing along the side of the vault, and retiring by the north ; which they did in the most decent and orderly manner. As soon as the public curiosity was gratified, the vault was levelled to the floor, which was also taken up and laid level, and upon the top of it was placed a bed of bricks laid in mortar, on which, and in the exact situation in which the skeleton was found, the leaden coffin was placed, and the body carefully deposited in it. It was then filled up within two inches of the top with the melted pitch, and the top soldered on; upon which was cast, in raised letters, the following inscription, denoting the year of the King's death, and of his re-interment. The sides of the vault were then built up with bricks, the whole arched over, and a strong stone wall, 18 inches thick, was built all-round the brick arch.
In the course of clearing out the rubbish of the large outer vault, the workmen came upon a small leaden box, 2 feet 6 inches in length, 9 inches in breadth, and 5 inches in depth, lying about 11 feet 6 inches distant from the east end of the outer vault, in a north-east direction from the tomb ; this we carefully examined, and found in it, a considerable quantity of a substance resembling lime, and a small substance, from 6 to 8 inches in length, and 4 inches in breadth, and about half an inch thick, of a tuff and firm texture, apparently of animal substance; it was most probably the bowels of some person of consideration, who had been buried in the church; but not likely those of King Robert, as it was found at so great a distance from his tomb, and not even within the outer vault already described; but it was judged proper to deposit it in the large leaden coffin, along with the skeleton.
Vertical Measurements.
										Ft. 	In
1. Vertical distance from the vertex of the Head to the Symphysis of the Chin   0	9
2. Vertical distance from the vertex of the Head to the top of the Sternum	1	0 
3. distance from the vertex of the Head to the Symphysis of the
Os Pubic,									3	0
4. Length of the whole figure,							5	11
Transverse Measurements.
5. Transverse diameter of the Face between the Cheek Bones,			0	5 1/4
6. ------------ diameter between the heads of the Ossa Humeri,			1	4 1/2
7. ------------ superior diameter of the Pelvis between the crests of the
Ossa Ilium,									0	11 1/2
Measurements of Extremities.
8. Length from the Acromial Process of the Scapula to the Olecranon of
the Ulna,									1	2

9. ------------ from the Olecranon to the extremity of the Carpal bones,		0	10 1/2
10. ----------- of Metacarpal Bones,						0	3
11. ----------- from the crest of the Os Ilium to the top of the Patella,	1	7 1/2
12. ----------- from the top of the Patella to the concave side of the Mete
tarsal Arch,									1	6 ½
Measurements of separate Bones.
13. ----------- Os Femoris,							1	5 1/2
14. ----------- Os Tibiæ,							1	3 1/2
--------------- longest Rib,							0	10

Several years ago, a monument had been erected to the memory of the late Earl of Elgin, (who died in 1771,) in the immediate vicinity of the tomb of King Robert Bruce, and which, upon its interfering with the plan of the new church, was, by the orders of the present Earl, removed to another part of the churchyard; and the workmen, in the course of their operations, came upon a stone vault, part of which I saw in February 1818. Its appearance was very similar in its construction to King Robert's, but of smaller dimensions. - In this, I was told the remains of a human skeleton were found; and it has even been asserted, that it was ascertained to be that of a female. From the situation of this vault, being within a few feet of the outer one already described, I am inclined to think it contained the remains of King Robert's Queen, who, as Fortune says, was placed juxta sponsum suum; but the skeleton was removed from the place before I had an opportunity of seeing it

