
The following statement has been drawn up for publication by the Right Rev. the LORD BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL, and a Sub-Committee acting with him for that purpose.
The Association has been founded to counteract the evils which have grown round the customary mode of interment. Those evils, it is believed, have mainly arisen from a natural and laudable desire to pay honour to the departed; but the manner in which that desire has been commonly manifested involves an expenditure wholly out of proportion to its object, in many cases beyond the means of the surviving relatives, and is also, often, a source of evil to the public health. It is a matter of everyday experience that when the head of a family has passed away, the widow and children are found soon after in a state of destitution, though a large sum has been received from clubs or private benevolence, most of which has been spent on an ostentatious funeral and mourning,
The Association therefore strongly urges the following specific reforms: -
FUNERALS. - 1. The exercise of economy and simplicity in everything appertaining to the funeral.
2. The use of plain hearses or wheeled biers.
3. The disuse of crape, scarves, feathers, velvet trappings and the like.
4. The avoiding of excessive floral decoration.
5. The discouraging, on the occasion of the funeral, as far as possible, of all eating and drinking beyond that of every-day life.
6. The meeting in the Churchyard or Cemetery instead of at the house of mourning.
7. The dispelling of the idea that all the Club money must be spent on the funeral.
BURIALS, - 1. The early interment of the body in soil sufficient and suitable for its resolution to its ultimate elements.
2. The use of such materials for the coffin as will rapidly decay after burial. N.B.--This method is in accordance with the laws of nature, and avoids sanitary evils, while the practice of burying in almost imperishable coffins is fraught with danger.
3. The substitution of burial plots, surrounded by coping, for family vaults.
4. The encouragement, on sanitary grounds, of the removal, in crowded districts, of the body to a mortuary, instead of retaining it in the rooms occupied by the living.
The Council are happy to state that the above principles are already being acted upon by many in high social position; and earnestly appeal to the wealthier classes, whose example has so powerful an influence, to give practical effect to them; and in order to render this easier to their surviving relatives or executors, to leave clear and strict injunctions in writing that the utmost simplicity and economy be observed in their funerals.
The following are the SPECIFIC REFORMS suggested by
the Association [CHURCH OF ENGLAND Burial, Funeral & Mourning Reform ASSOCIATION.]: -
1. The adoption of every necessary sanitary precaution in the interests of the living, instead of paying inordinate (or too little) regard to the dead body.
2. Burial as soon as decomposition has been declared by competent authority to have set in, instead of undue retention of the body above ground.
3. The use of a readily-perishable; inexpensive coffin, of pine, unsound deal, hardened pulp or the like, instead of a heavy, costly coffin, of durable wood or metal.
4. Proper sanitary burial in earth sufficient and of a nature to effect the dissolution of the body, instead of imperfect, insanitary burial in a durable coffin in a vault, bricked grave, or already crowed pit.
5. Moderation, instead of excess in every detail.
6. Simplicity, instead of unnecessary show.
7. Practical Christian sympathy with the bereaved, instead of causing them expense.
NO RULES ARE LAID DOWN AS TO THE CONDUCT OF MEMBERS' FUNERALS, each member being free to exercise his own judgment as to adopting or rejecting the Society's "suggestions" - membership merely implying general approval of the principles enunciated by the Society.
THE RATIONAL DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD.
The object of this paper, I may say at once, is to contrast the safe and rational disposal of the dead with the unsafe and irrational method of burial which we practice, and with the equally unsafe and wholly unnecessary practice of cremation. Since, however, it is not possible to deal with so large a question within the few minutes placed at our disposal, I have no choice than, by a series of short propositions having a general bearing upon the subject, to present the case to you in its mere outline, and then, by such a reference to one or more of those propositions as time will permit, to found on that reference a plea for legislation. The propositions in question are: -
(1) That the natural destination of all organized bodies that have lived, and that die on the earth's surface, is the earth.
(2) That the evils which certain theorists would have us believe to be inseparable from the principle of interment, are independent of that principle and of our own creation.
(3) That the source of these evils is to be found, not in the burial of the dead, but in the unreasoning sentiment which prompts us to keep them unburied as long as possible, and then to bury them in such a way that the earth can have no access to them.
(4) That the principle of burial supposes the resolution of the body by the agency of the earth to which we commit it, and that the earth is competent to effect that resolution, and to effect it innocuously.
(5) That to seek to prevent the beneficent agency of the earth by enclosing the dead in imperishable coffins, brick graves, and vaults, is in the highest degree irrational, since it engages us in a vain resistance to an inevitable dispensation, and has led us to accumulate in our midst a vast store of human remains in every stage and condition of decay.
(6) That the remedy for such evils is not in cremation, but in a sensible recognition of, and a timely submission to, a well-defined law of Nature, and by legislative action to enforce the provisions of that law.
I propose to-day to deal with the 5th and 6th of these propositions only, and, that the connection of these two with the conclusions arrived at in this paper may be the more apparent, to remind you in the first place of the following facts: - First. That so long ago as 1840, in consequence of the disclosures then made to them of the shocking state of the city graveyards, the Government of that day issued a commission to enquire into and report upon the subject.
 2nd. That this commission, under the title of ???The Board of Health,??? sat for fourteen years, and, by the end of the first three, that it had examined into and reported upon the whole system of cemeterial management as carried out by ourselves and by the rest of Europe. 
3rd. That although, in making that examination, it must have come under the notice of the members of that commission - and that again and again - that the coffins in use in every country but our own were of a light and perishable nature - mere orange boxes in fact in comparison with those we use -the fact, nevertheless, seems to have made no impression upon them, since, in the report they issued, no reference is made to it.  
4th. That, in connection with this fact, while seeing on all parts of the continent, burial grounds far more ancient than our own, which had yet preserved their natural level, while ours had become raised many feet by the accumulation of the bodies within them - the connection in question, pregnant, as it was, with matter for reflection and suggestion, is not even referred to in the report they made, and therefore that no conclusions are sought to be founded on it. 
5th. That although they both saw and reported that no Government but our own entrusted so important a matter as the burial of the dead to private persons - still less to undertakers, joint-stock companies, and owners of ground interested in finding room in it for as many corpses as possible, and in enclosing those corpses in the costliest possible envelopes - yet they in their report found no conclusions or made any recommendations on the subject, and in suggesting the closure of the old and the opening of similar burial grounds outside the town, that they leave the administration of those new burial grounds an open question. 
6th, and finally, that the Government of that day in opening the new cemeteries in the stiffest clay, and in stipulating that they should not come within a specified distance of the town, forgot that there was nothing to prevent the town from coming up to the new cemeteries, and, as a consequence, that one of the worst of these cemeteries, containing as it does 155,000 corpses in an unadvancing state of putrefaction, is now the centre of a populous and fashionable district, and that every day of the week makes a sensible addition to the horrible quotient.
It was under these circumstances that we then began to hear of cremation. Now I need scarcely say that I attach the fullest credit to any public-spirited suggestion intended to deal with so great an evil. What, however, I mean to say here of that suggestion is, that it was not a right one, and that it was put altogether out of court by the incident which I am about to describe, and in consequence of which, as the advocates of cremation very well know, was heard no more of for years; and then only again because it became evident the Government meant to do nothing.
The event in question which put an entirely new face upon the matter, and which, though still ignored and unacted upon, is destined one of these days to relieve us of a heavy burden, and our national intelligence of an equally heavy reproach, was this: - In 1875 it had become necessary to level Holborn Hill, and to effect this to make a clean cut through the whole thickness of the adjacent burial ground of St. Andrew's, which at that point had become raised, by the accumulation of bodies within it, as much as eighteen feet above its original level. That ghastly section it was my lot to see and examine. I have elsewhere described it.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to say more of it here than that, having been made from above downwards, and from east to west, it had exposed in their full length both the bodies of the dead and the coffins which contained them, and that in the exact positions they had occupied for two centuries and a half. It was also noticeable that very little, if any, soil had been allowed to remain between any two coffins, so that, as these coffins were in close apposition, each body within them had become invested with a double casing of wood. What, however, was most noticeable was the fact that both the bodies themselves and the coffins that enclosed them were, as to decay, in much the same state as when they were first buried - in a state, that is to say, of an unadvanced and unadvancing decomposition, and, even as to this, that little or no difference was observable between the interments of yesterday and the interments of Charles II.'s time. On what, therefore, I found myself in the position of having to ask myself, did a fact in every way so remarkable depend? It was not in the nature of animal matter to remain thus unresolved. All nitrogenous matters were and must be so resolved when buried within the earth. What had we here then to account for a state of things in every way so abnormal? And then it was, and not till then, that I remembered that wood was a non-nitrogenous body, and, this being so, that it would not undergo disintegration when thus buried, and this reflection being supported by finding the very sawdust which had been used for filling in the coffins also unchanged, it was, I found, impossible to resist the conclusion that it was the hermetical enclosure of these perishable bodies in coffins that were themselves imperishable, which had arrested their decay and prevented their resolution ; in other words, that it was we ourselves, by the unintelligent practice in which we were engaged, that had brought about this terrible accumulation, and, such being the case, that it rested with ourselves - and that at any moment we pleased - to undo the mischief we had done.
But if, as I think I have now shown, that it is the imperishable coffin which is the material cause of so much mischief, the moral cause of it - I regret to have to be so outspoken - is the unreasoning sentiment which prompts us to keep our dead unburied till its use becomes ?? necessity.  Why, I again ask, the terrible cost considered, do we persist in such a habit? Why does the law, so stringent on this point in other countries, permit us to do it? The signs of death are now too well known to be mistaken by anybody. One of these signs - the rigour mortise - is within the recognition of anyone, and it is within the easy comprehension of everyone that it is the subsidence of this state of rigidity which is the commencement of putrefaction; and, again, that it is this commencement of putrefaction which necessitates the hermetical enclosure referred to. Obviously, therefore, what is here wanted is legal prescription - that gently imperative guidance which we all look for and find to be such a relief under circumstances which impair for a time our own proper judgment, and which at the hands of a paternal Government I say we have a right to look for. It is quite a mistake to suppose that such action would be resented. There was a consensus of opinion in its favour when I first wrote upon the subject, and there would be again, the moment it was seen and understood that the Government was in earnest in the matter. Meanwhile, I hope I may be forgiven - and if I am not it matters little, since I shall so soon be called upon to illustrate my own theory - if I venture to say that I know nothing more characteristic of the kind of government we enjoy than that the announcement of a state of things at once so little creditable to our intelligence, so injurious to our interests, so obvious as to its cause, and so easy as to its remedy, should, for fifteen years, have been so entirely ignored as to have produced nothing better than the ??? memoranda " which are still issued by the Local Government Board for what I fear I can only call improper and insanitary burial, and the unnatural, unnecessary and dangerous proposals of the advocates of cremation.
Meanwhile, the only genuine effort which has been made to deal with that form of demoralisation which more or less prevails in every house on the occasion of a death, has been that inaugurated by my able and energetic friend, the Rev. Mr. Lawrence, of Weston Vicarage, York. In the Church of England Funeral Reform Association, of which he is the founder, we have a strikingly sustained instance of such an effort, and it is with the greatest regret that I now see so excellent movement in some danger of disruption. Such danger however exists, and, if I may be permitted to say so, has arisen out of a well-meaning but mistaken attempt on the part of its supporters to make it a sanitary as well as a mere movement ad bonos mores. For such an extension of their original scheme they must pardon me if I say that they were not prepared, and that by education and habits of thought they are unfitted. The attempt, in fact, has opened the door for the introduction among them of theories, the mischievous character of which they were not at first able to perceive, and with which, now that they have perceived it, they are unable to cope - I mean the inroad on their councils of the cremationist and the use he has made of them for the extension of his propaganda. I very much fear that unless, by a frank return to their original programme, (which was merely one for the simplification of funerals and the discouragement of excess in the direction of paraphernalia) they can purge themselves of this lethal element, and so restore this otherwise excellent movement within clerical limits, it may suffer shipwreck.
Another discouraging circumstance is to be found in the conduct of that very Suburban Cemetery Company which was the first to profit and which has most profited by the practice of burial I am here advocating, and which, properly directed, and with the ground they occupy, has had and has more in its power for good than any similar association. When the Directors of the Woking Necropolis Company, acting on the suggestions made to them for the employment in their grounds of a coffin as perishable as the body it contained, patented such a coffin, they were bound, on the expiration of that patent, to throw the invention open to the world whose property it had become. As I am informed, they have not done so, and, on some excuse which I have been unable to penetrate, have renewed that patent, or sought to renew it, and so deprived the public for another term of years of the value of a suggestion which it must be remembered had been made not by, but to, them. Here, again, I would say respectfully, is a case in which the Government, by their legal officers, ought at once to interfere.
I now approach the last, and perhaps the most discouraging part of the subject with which I have undertaken to deal - cremation. I have already shown that in the case of proper burial it is uncalled for, and in the case of improper burial but the substitution of one evil for another. I now say, in addition to this, that it is a direct and potent incentive to crime. Everyone knows how often murder - especially murder by poison ??? has been brought to light by the exhumation, even after long periods, of the buried body, and everyone must also know how impossible such detection is when that body has been driven by the furnace into space. I am not permitted, it appears, by the rules which govern the production of these Papers, to repeat here what I have said upon this part of the subject elsewhere; yet it is only by iteration and reiteration that any impression, either for good or for evil, -and it matters very little, I am sorry to say, which it is, - can ever be made on what is called popular opinion,??? which, in fact, is not opinion at all. Those who remember how horrified we all were at the first mention of Home Rule, and who see how easily that treasonable alternative sits on our consciences now, will bear me out in this, and will understand how it is that, being denied the use of this effective weapon, I have no choice than to appeal and reappeal to the Government to expose and dispose, at once and for ever, of the whole so-called ???argument??? in favour of cremation. They can do it if they please as readily as they disposed of the dangerous, but far less dangerous, use of explosives. A simple return of the number of exhumations rendered necessary for the detection of murder within the last twenty-five or thirty years will prove, I undertake to say, abundantly sufficient for the purpose. I call upon them for such a return.
Meanwhile, what is the argument in favour of cremation? It is based, so far as I can see, chiefly on statements which depend for their intended pungency on a simple abuse of language and on the effect of that language, not on the popular intelligence, but on the popular ear. In the Nineteenth Century, of last May, we have an example of such language in its quintessence. The buried body, the cremationist tells us, does not, as I say it does, re-enter the atmosphere to contribute to its renewal and to the nourishment and growth of plants, but depends for its resolution ???at - least in an equal degree" (I use the very words of "an expert" called in by the cremationist element on the Council of the Church of England Funeral Reform Association to warrant their rejection of my views on the subject) it depends - so says our expert - at least in an equal degree on the action of microbes, which action the public understands as a sort of ghoul-like form of cannibalism on the part of these novel agencies, and they are largely assisted in this belief by finding in such a popular article as that to which I am directing your attention, these lowest forms of vegetation described "creatures," "leaping??? and ???darting" on their "prey," &c., precisely as if they were endowed, in what are also called ???their habits," with something like volition. Well, I entirely acquit the charming and able writer of this article of anything more than a desire to popularise the science of bacteriology, but I do not acquit the apostles of cremation of a readiness to profit by such writing, and, by not repudiating it, of leaving on the mind of the uninitiated the impression that the human body committed to the earth is really subjected to such assaults, and of so creating a prejudice against its proper burial and in favour of cremation. As well might it be said that the visible propulsion forward of a crystal in a saturated solution, or of the frost upon the windowpane, is evidence of animal life and of a predatory instinct. Nor, though I make no pretension to be an expert myself, can I bring myself to believe that these unpretending saprophytic-like fungi, so useful on the surface, are likely to be found at all as much as four feet below the surface, which it will be remembered is the minimum depth prescribed by the Local Government Board for the interment of all adults.
In conclusion, I can only repeat my conviction that what is wanted is not a Bill to regulate cremation - which, on the contrary, as a measure of public safety, ought rather to be once declared illegal - but a Bill to regulate and insure safe and proper burial; which Bill to be effectual should also, I think, besides, dealing with the whole subject of cemeterial management, contain the following provisions: 
(1) For burial within the earth as the only legal mode of disposing of a dead body.
(2) For a limitation of time beyond which it should be illegal to keep a dead body unburied.
(3) For the illegality of strong coffins, brick graves and vaults, and of all contrivances having for their effect to retard resolution, and to confer on the dead a tenure, practically illimitable, of the soil which is necessary to the purposes of the living.
And I would even go further, and venture to affirm that such a Bill, besides being a measure of great social, economical, and sanitary importance, would be a positive and grateful relief to everybody.



