THE RESTORATIONS IN 1876-7. 
ENCUMBERED as it was by high pews and unsightly galleries, the pavement broken and uneven, the walls and columns disfigured with whitewash and unimportant tablets, the sight of the interior of the chapel may well have awakened Lord Macaulay's eloquent protest, and for some years it had been desired to improve this state of things, and to restore the chapel to a decent and sightly condition. 
In 1862, the insignificant porch on the south side, by which the building had been entered since the time of Queen Elizabeth, was removed, and the original old doorway at the west end, which had been bricked up and concealed by plaster, was reopened, and the fragments of the window above, being found there, they were restored to their original position. The lath and plaster covering was at the same time removed from the ceiling, and the old chestnut beams of Henry VIII.'s roof were disclosed to view. 
At length the necessity for a thorough restoration and repair became imperative for sanitary reasons, and in the early part of the year 1876 the Constable, Sir Charles York, took the necessary steps for submitting the proposed plan for the decision of Her Majesty the Queen. It was then decided that the chapel should be, as far as possible, architecturally restored to its original condition, and also suitably arranged as a place of worship for the use of the residents and garrison of the Tower. 
The question then came under the consideration of the First Commissioner of Her Majesty's Works, when Mr. John Taylor of that Department prepared comprehensive plans for its restoration: these were submitted to Mr. Salvin, the architect under whose superintendence all the other works of restoration throughout the Tower have been carried out, and the operations were commenced in the month of August, 1876. 
When the designs for the repair and restoration of the chapel came under consideration, the necessity for relaying the pavement, which had sunk and become uneven in many parts, became very evident; and upon the removal of the pews, it was at once seen that nothing could be done until a level and safe foundation was prepared, upon which the new pavement could be placed; it was moreover intended that a heating apparatus should be fitted in the church. 
On removing the stones of the pavement it was found (as reference to the burial register too abundantly proved) that the resting places of those who had been buried within the walls of the chapel during the troublous times of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, had been repeatedly and it was feared almost universally desecrated. 
When the Tower ceased to be a residence of the sovereign or a state prison, the chapel of St. Peter appears to have gradually come to be regarded too much in the light of a mere ordinary parish church, in which the interment not only of those who had lived in the Tower, but even of residents in the neighbourhood, was freely permitted. 
It is true that the bodies of those who had perished on the scaffold, or died as prisoners within the walls of the Tower, were buried (no doubt intentionally) in great obscurity;' but even if some memorial stone had recorded their burial place, it is doubtful whether that would have protected their remains, for in the instance of the three Scotch lords (Loveit, Balmerino, and Kilmarnock) although their grave was specially marked by a stone, which is still preserved, (This stone still remains in its original position in the pavement near the west door.) it was found that their bones had been much disturbed, so much so indeed as to be beyond all possible means of identification. It is even feared that in some instances coffins had been designedly broken up and their contents scattered in order to make room for some fresh occupant of the ground. 
Many of the more recent interments were barely two feet below the surface, and in no instances were any graves found lower than five or six feet; a continual sinking of many parts of the surface was certain to occur, and moreover, for sanitary reasons, it was most imperative that the ground should be cleared and readjusted to a proper level. It was therefore considered advisable to take immediate steps for removing all the remains into the crypt, only retaining in position some of the brick vaults which were found in different parts and which appeared to be in perfectly sound condition. These have now been covered with a firm bed of concrete. 
The Constable of the Tower submitted this proposal for the approval of the Queen, and Her Majesty, while expressing her great regret at learning that so little respect should have apparently been shown to the remains of the dead, gave her sanction to the plan, with the express condition that the greatest care and reverence should be exercised in this removal, and that a careful record should be kept of every sign of possible identification which might come to light. 
These conditions have been scrupulously observed, and the operations have been carried out by the Office of Works, and under the immediate personal supervision of Major General Maitland, the Lieutenant, and of Colonel Milman, the resident governor of the Tower. 
All the human remains which were found beneath the floor of the chapel were carefully collected and enclosed in boxes, with suitable inscriptions; and all the coffins which were found intact were at once removed to the crypt. The crypt is on the north side of the chapel, and it is not unlikely that it was beneath the old chapel. It was originally entered from the chapel, and a door leading towards it, which had been bricked up, was recently found in the north wall. 
The works had progressed so far, when in October, 1876, it became necessary to consider the arrangements for the restoration of the chancel; and it was pointed out that as the Queens Anne Boleyn and Katherine Howard, and the Dukes of Somerset, Northumberland, and Monmouth, were undoubtedly known to have been buried there, it would be very desirable (although other interments certainly had been permitted) to allow this portion of the chapel to remain undisturbed; and at a meeting which took place in the chapel, at which Major General Maitland, the Honourable S. Ponsonby Fane, Colonel Milman, Colonel the Honourable G. Wrottesley,(as representative of the family of Sir John Burgoyne) and Mr. Doyne C. Bell, were present, it was resolved that this pavement should remain intact, and that the new pavement should be laid over it. 
A subsequent examination by the Surveyor of the Office of Works showed however that this was practically impossible, as in two places the pavement had sunk, and showed signs of considerable hollowness beneath it. It was therefore decided that the pavement must be removed in order that this sinking might be rectified, but that as little disturbance of the ground as possible should take place. 
At a meeting held in the chapel of St. Peter ad Vincula in the Tower on Thursday, 9th November, at half-past twelve o'clock, Mr. Mitford produced a plan which had been prepared by the Clerk of the Works; this plan showed the present condition of the pavement of the chancel, and recorded the memorial stones with their inscriptions. He also explained that it was intended to repair the chancel with tiles or symmetrical paving, so as to bring it into harmony with the restorations which were being carried out in the rest of the chapel. It had been at first decided that this pavement should not be moved, and that the tiles, or new pavement, should be fixed upon it: one reason for this decision was, that the chancel had been less disturbed for recent interments than the other parts of the chapel, and it was therefore hoped that the remains of some of those, who were known to have been interred on this spot in the sixteenth century, might still be remaining in situ. 
Mr. Bell then showed a plan which he had prepared, showing the relative positions in which it was believed that these persons had originally been buried. This plan had been prepared after consulting various historical authorities. 
Mr. Mitford explained that a recent examination of the pavement showed however that it would not be safe, or of good construction, to place any new pavement upon the present stones, as two portions, which he pointed out, had considerably sunk and bore every evidence of being hollow underneath, so that further sinking would in all probability shortly take place; the small brick grave in which Sir John Burgoyne had been buried in 1870 was indeed the only spot in the chancel which could be thoroughly relied upon. 
Upon this evidence, it was decided that the pavement should be raised, in order to remedy any further sinking; that the greatest caution should be used in removing every spadeful of earth; that the earth should be carefully examined with a sieve; that whatever remains were found should be re-interred on the same spot; and that these operations should be carried out under the supervision of some, or all, of the persons who were then present. 
The pavement was then lifted on the spot which was marked on the plan as the place of Queen Anne Boleyn's interment, and the earth removed to a depth of two feet; it had certainly not been disturbed for upwards of a hundred years. 
At this depth the bones of a female were found, not lying in the original order, but which had evidently for some reason or other been heaped together into a smaller space: all these bones were examined by Dr. Mouat, who at once pronounced them to be those of a female of between twenty five and thirty years of age, of a delicate frame of body, and who had been of slender and perfect proportions; the forehead and lower jaw were small and especially well formed. The vertebrae were particularly small, especially one joint (the atlas), which was that next to the skull, and they bore witness to the Queen's little neck.' He thought that these female bones had lain in the earth for upwards of three hundred years, and they were certainly all those of one person. No other female bones were found on this spot. 
Not much doubt existed in the minds of those present that these were the remains of Anne Boleyn, who is recorded to have been buried in front of the altar by the side of her brother George Rochford, and these being the first burials in the chancel, the graves were in all probability dug to the right or dexter side of the altar, the so-called 'place of honour.' Rochford was buried on the 17th May, and the grave into which, at noon on the 19th May, the old elm chest containing the remains of his sister Anne was cast, was dug by the side of him. Stow says 'he lies with the rest.' 
Some male bones belonging to a man of considerable stature, and of about fifty years of age, were found close to those of the Queen, but they were lying separate, and no intermixture had taken place; these were few in number, and appeared also to have been collected and placed together for some special reason. 
It was evident that when the ground had been disturbed, probably about one hundred years ago, the re-arrangement of these remains had been effected with considerable care; and that much respect had undoubtedly been shown to them. 
When the grave for Sir J. Burgoyne was prepared, some bones corresponding to the male bones now found, were discovered lying loosely in the earth; these had been all placed together more towards the east wall, near the spot where the Duke of Monmouth's remains lie; it is supposed that the bones now found had fallen out of position when Hannah Beresford was interred, and they were therefore not seen when Sir J. Burgoyne was buried in 1870. 
These large male bones are doubtless those of the Protector Somerset; he and John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, were buried between the two Queens, Anne Boleyn and Katherine Howard, and in front of the altar. The Duke of Somerset being buried in 1551, and Northumberland two years later. 
The bones of George Rochford may have been removed at the same period, or else they lie more towards the north wall; but it was not thought desirable or necessary to examine that ground, especially as it might have affected the stability of the Blount monument. 
The removal of another two feet of earth disclosed the cause of the sinking of the pavement, and also explained in some measure the reason why, and furnished the probable date when the remains of Queen Anne Boleyn had been gathered together. The lead coffin of Hannah Beresford, August 1750, aged fifty-four years, was reached, and this had decayed and collapsed, leaving the ground above it loose and hollow to such an extent that the workman was able to pass his arm freely up the cavity. 
All the remains which had been discovered were carefully sorted and immediately locked up in a box, to remain in the custody of Colonel Milman, the Resident Governor of the Tower, until suitable receptacles could be made and the ground prepared for their re-interment. 
Mr. Mitford had pointed out on the 9th November [1876] that the pavement had sunk very considerably on the south as well as on the north side of the chancel, and it had therefore been decided to lift the stones of that portion; this had been done when we arrived, but the earth had not been removed at any part. 
Mr. Bell indicated on his plan the spot where John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, and Queen Katherine Howard are recorded to have been interred, and he also expressed an opinion that Margaret of Clarence, Countess of Salisbury, had been buried near Katherine Howard, as she was beheaded soon after that Queen, and it is said she 'rested with the attainted group' in the chancel. 
Lady Rochford was beheaded on the same day as Katherine Howard, and might very possibly have been buried by her side. Bailey says she was, but does not give his authority for this statement. 
It was recommended that the ground nearest to Sir John Burgoyne's grave should be first examined; this was the spot where the Duke of Northumberland is recorded to have been buried. About two feet below the surface, and precisely in the position which had been expected, were found the male bones of a person of about fifty years of age: a large skull was found with them, and it is specially recorded that the Duke's head was not exposed on London Bridge or elsewhere, but buried with his body. 
There appeared no reason to doubt that these were the remains of John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland; they had been much shaken during the formation of Sir J. Burgoyne's grave, but most of the skeleton was collected. 
Close by, somewhat in a south-east direction, and nearer to the wall of the chancel, gathered together in two distinct groups, were found the bones of two females; these were examined and carefully sorted, they appeared to belong to a person of about thirty to forty years of age, and to another who must have been considerably advanced in years. It is worthy of note that these latter remains were a little to the south-east of the younger female. 
These groups had been much disturbed, and many bones are missing: the younger female had been of rather delicate proportions, the elder had been tall, and certainly of above average height. 
These remains are believed to be those of Lady Rochford and Margaret of Clarence, Countess of Salisbury: and, as was subsequently discovered, they had been removed somewhat to the east of their original resting places, in order to make room for two unknown persons, who had been buried close to the step of the chancel, probably about one hundred years ago. 
No remains which could be identified as those of Queen Katherine Howard were found; it should, however, be borne in mind that lime has been most extensively used in these interments, and as Katherine Howard was only twenty years old when she was beheaded (at which age the bones have not become hard and consolidated), it is very possible that even when Judge Jeffreys was interred in the chancel, her remains had already become dust. It was at first supposed, as she had been buried on this spot, that her remains had been discovered, when the group of female bones were found lying near the Duke of Northumberland; but a closer examination showed that the age and size of the bones (Katherine Howard is said to have been very small in stature) would not support that supposition, and these are now believed to be the remains of Lady Rochford. 
A large male skeleton was found beneath the stone which formerly bore the name of Sir Allan Apsley, Lieutenant of the Tower, who was buried in 1630. 
Close against the east wall, and lying partly on the concrete foundation of that wall, were discovered the leg bones of a tall man: they were not lying in the usual position, east and west, but north and south. 
James, Duke of Monmouth, was buried under the communion table,' and there can be no doubt of this identification of his remains. The earth was only partially removed, so that only the leg bones were seen. 
At a depth of six inches lower than the grave of the Duke of Monmouth was found a large male skeleton, lying north-east and south-east, the skull, face downwards, being towards the altar and close to the legs of the Duke of Monmouth. This body was at first supposed to be that of Judge Jeffreys, who it is recorded was buried 'by the Duke of Monmouth.' But it was afterwards ascertained that although interred here in 1689, his body was removed to the church of St. Mary, Aldermanbury, in 1692. These remains have not yet been identified. It was evident that this interment had much deranged that of Sir A. Apsley, and might also have caused some removal of the remains, believed to be those of Margaret of Clarence, Countess of Salisbury. 
A broken tobacco pipe of the 17th century and a fragment of silk were found between this body, and the supposed remains of Lady Rochford and the Countess of Salisbury. 
The cause of the sinking of the pavement on this side of the chancel was now discovered, as close beyond the remains of Sir A. Apsley, the earth suddenly collapsed, and it was then ascertained that this was occasioned by the interment of Colonel Maclean, in 1816; either his coffin had much collapsed, or else the earth had been too loosely filled in after his burial. 
It was decided to make no further examination of the ground, and the excavation was therefore at once filled up. 
All the remains that had been taken out were examined seriatim by Dr. Mouat, and were carefully sorted and placed apart. These several parcels were duly labelled and fastened up, and then conveyed in boxes to the Queen's House,' where they will remain locked up in the custody of Colonel Milman, until the leaden coffers are ready to receive them, when they will be re-interred in the same positions in which they were found. 
QUEEN ANNE BOLEYN. 
The bones found in the place where Queen Anne Boleyn is said to have been buried are certainly those of a female in the prime of life, all perfectly consolidated and symmetrical, and belong to the same person. 
The bones of the head indicate a well-formed round skull, with an intellectual forehead, straight orbital ridge, large eyes, oval face, and rather square full chin. The remains of the vertebrae, and the bones of the lower limbs, indicate a well-formed woman of middle height, with a short and slender neck. The ribs show depth and roundness of chest. The hand and feet bones indicate delicate and well-shaped hands and feet, with tapering fingers and a narrow foot. 
They are all consistent with the published descriptions of the Queen, and the bones of the skull might well belong to the person portrayed in the painting by Holbein, in the collection of the Earl of Warwick. 


THE DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 
The bones supposed to be those of the Duke of Northumberland are of a tall powerful man, above fifty years of age, and they have been very long in the ground, quite three centuries I should say. 
COUNTESS OF SALISBURY. 
The bones found are few in number, but are all of the same person, a tall aged female. 
The absence in the vicinity of this grave of any of the bones of Queen Katherine Howard, is quite consistent with the fact of her youth. The bones at the age at which she was executed are softer in texture, and a great portion of them are more cartilaginous than when growth is completed, and the framework of the body consolidated; so that they would disintegrate and disappear much more rapidly than had she been fully formed, and the whole process of ossification been completed. The large admixture of lime with earth which was found in the grave would accelerate this process; there is nothing therefore inconsistent with the fact of her having been buried there, in the absence of any portion of her remains after a lapse of more than three centuries. 
The portions of the skeleton of the second female found, were those of a woman probably of forty years of age, of larger frame than Katherine Howard. They may possibly therefore have been those of Lady Rochford, who was executed at the same time. 
QUEEN ANNE BOLEYN. 
Frontal bone: tolerably complete, showing a forehead moderate in height, and of fair breadth; orbits large; superciliary ridge straight. 
A large portion of the occipital bone; in excellent preservation. 
Two portions of both upper maxillary bones. 
Several portions of the parietal bones; in good condition. 
Fragments of both temporal bones; much eroded in external plate. 
Small portions of the ethnoid and sphenoid bones. 
Lower jaw: two thirds perfect; the other third, on the left side, was broken off and not found: eight teeth remaining in jaw; four more teeth found loose (they had just fallen out), all in excellent preservation; one molar tooth of left side was slightly decayed. 
The form of the head appears to have been round, and the face of an oval shape; the forehead straight and ample, and denoting considerable intelligence. 
The lower part of the face, judging from the form of the jaw, must have been moderately full, with a somewhat square chin. 
Vertebr??--the atlas; very small, much eroded. Three dorsal vertebrae; probably the first and third. Three lumbar vertebrae, very perfect; the other vertebrae are much eroded. Judging from these vertebrae, her height might have been about 5 feet, or 5 feet 3 inches, not more. 
Four ribs, tolerably perfect; the rest fragmentary, in fifty-two pieces. 
Collarbone and clavicle; the left side perfect; a small portion of the right clavicle only remaining. 
Two fragments of the head of the scapula left side. Judging from the curvature of the ribs, she must have had a deep and well-formed chest. 
Eight fragments of the pelvis, very much eroded, and the characters almost obliterated. 
Portions of both legs: the left thigh bone, in tolerably good preservation, though broken off above, is singularly delicate and well formed; several portions of the tibi?? and fibul?? of both legs. 
Patella (kneecap) of left leg very perfect. 
Her limbs evidently bore a due proportion to the rest of her body. 
Portions of the humerus, and radius of the right side; the radius remarkably slender. 
Scaphoid bone of the right foot, and eleven bones of feet; all tarsal and metatarsal bones. 
Eleven finger bones; phalanges. The middle metacarpal bone of the right hand, and last bone of the little finger of left hand very perfect. These bones showed a slender and delicate formation of the hands. 
'There was found indeed upon the side of her nail upon one of her fingers some little show of a nail which yet was so small, by the report of those that have seen here, as the work moister seemed to leave it an occasion of greater grace to the hand, which with the tip of one of her other fingers might be, and was usually by her hidden without any lest blemish to it.'???-Wyatt's Life,' p. 4. It was at first thought that this malformation could be traced on one of the finger bones, but a more careful examination dissipated that impression. 
Fifty-two other fragments, very much eroded, and not susceptible of exact identification. 
THE DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 
These bones evidently belonged to a large man, about six feet in height; and aged about 50 years. They all belong to one person, and appear to have been in the ground at least 300 years. 
MARGARET COUNTESS OF SALISBURY. 
The bones believed to be those of Margaret Countess of Salisbury, are all those of a tall and aged female. 
Skull: considerable portion of the frontal bone with the left orbit: petrous portion of the temporal bone; two small fragments of the side of the skull. 
The upper portion of the sternum (breastbone); tolerably perfect. 
Six fragments of ribs. 
The sacrum; tolerably complete. 
Two portions of the pelvis. 
Portions of the radius of both arms; in good preservation. 
Portions of both clavicles. 
One dorsal and three lumbar vertebrae. 
Two fibul??; nearly complete. 
One finger bone. 
A portion of the humerus. 
Most of these bones in tolerable condition, but some eroded by lime. 
It was not considered necessary to make any further detailed examination of the other remains. 
A meeting was held in the chapel of St. Peter in the Tower, on Friday, the 13th April [1877], at twelve o'clock, when Colonel Milman produced seven cases, which contained the remains that had been exhumed from the chancel on the 9th and 11th November last. 
These remains had been soldered up in thick leaden coffers, and then fastened down with copper screws in boxes made of oak plank, one inch in thickness. Each box bore a leaden escutcheon, on which was engraved the name of the person whose supposed remains were thus enclosed, together with the dates of death, and of the year (1877) of the reinterment. 
The cases were then placed in the respective positions in the chancel in which the remains had been found, and the ground having been opened, they were all buried about four inches below the surface, the earth was then filled in, and concrete immediately spread over them. 
The various positions of these interments are recorded upon a plan which will be copied on vellum, and deposited among the records belonging to the Tower. 
