Dropsy, brought on by his [George Frederick Cooke] manner of living, was the cause of his death. He was fifty-five years old. He was buried on the day following, in the presence of an enormous gathering, in the strangers' corner of the cemetery of St. Paul's Church. Nine years later Edmund Kean, who had unbounded admiration for his genius, got permission to have the remains moved to another part of the cemetery, and erected a monument over them, on which we may read that:
"Three kingdoms claim his birth,
Both hemispheres pronounce his worth!"
There is a legend that his body was disinterred, and his skull is in the possession of a private collector to this day, but Kean found some remains. He declared very solemnly on his deathbed that he was born at Westminster. Shortly before his death he received a letter from Harris begging him to return to Covent Garden.
As a man, the less said of Cooke the better. In addition to his excesses and intemperance he was a vain, quarrelsome brute, with an inordinate opinion of his own importance. He generally alluded to himself very pompously as “George Frederick Cooke." He was fond of pompous and high-falutin language, especially when in his cups, when he would address his adversaries in Mosaic and sometimes still more exalted phrases. If his audience did not think sufficiently of him he would not hesitate to tell them then and there what he thought of them. He once told a Liverpool audience that there was not a brick in their houses that was not cemented by the blood of a fellow-creature,” very impressive! He kept a diary - of his virtues! He was generous with his money, and curiously enough succeeded in dying with plenty of it in his possession. He was a fine critic, and did not attempt to spare himself when he considered he had failed. He also freely acknowledged his debt to other great actors whom he had seen. This frankness was one of the best traits in a nature where good ones were scarce.
As an actor and an artist he belongs to the very highest rank. He is best compared to Macklin and Edmund Kean. Greater than the former, but not so great as the latter.

