
 The mausoleum [for Robert Burns} was completed in 1815, and as the spot where the bard originally lay in the northern corner of St. Michael's, afforded nothing like adequate scope for the erection of such a bulky structure, it became necessary to disinter his remains. The day fixed for this ceremony was the 19th September, 1815, and as secrecy was of the greatest possible consequence, Mr Grierson, secretary to the committee, Mr James Thomson, superintendent of the monument, Mr Milligan, builder, and Mr Bogey, Terraughty, proceeded to the spot before the sun had risen, and made so good a use of their time, that the imposing ceremony was well-nigh completed before the public had time to assemble, or, in fact, were aware of the important duty in which they had been engaged.
And it was fortunate their plans were so well laid; for though, the gates of St. Michael's were carefully looked, a few early risers and accidental observers, immediately communicated their suspicions to others, and before the mouth of the vault would be closed, curiosity had risen to such a pitch, that the crowd that appeared demanding admittance could only be compared to the letting out of waters. To obtain the consent of Mrs Burns, was a matter of equal delicacy and difficulty; and with one exception -- that is, when her husband returned from the Brow, the mere ghost of what he had been - it may be doubted whether in the whole course of her life she ever evinced greater emotion. To disturb in any way the sanctity of the tomb, is a proceeding most revolting to Scottish feeling ; and though it was meet and proper that the remains of the Bard should be removed to the proud mausoleum prepared for them, her mind was so much disturbed on the occasion, that she retired to the country for a fortnight or more. 
The inscription on the original tomb-stone was simply as follows: - "In memory of ROBERT BURNS, who died the 21st July, 1796, in the 37th year of his age; and Maxwell Burns, who died the 25th April, 1799, aged 2 years and 9 months; also of Francis Wallace Burns, who died the 9th July, 1803, aged 14 years." 
On opening the grave, the coffins of the boys (the youngest of whom, a posthumous child, was born the very day his father was buried) were found in a tolerably entire state, placed in shells, and conveyed to the vault with the greatest care. The persons above named discharged most sternly their duty as sentinels, by repressing all attempts at obtaining relics, and collecting and removing with the most scrupulous fidelity the whole contents of the respective coffins, down to the minutest portion of what had once been animated dust. As a report had been spread that the principal coffin was made of oak, a hope was entertained that it would be possible to transport it from the north to the east corner of St Michael's, without opening it, or disturbing the sacred deposit it contained. But this hope proved fallacious; on testing the coffin, it was found to be composed of the ordinary materials, and ready to yield to the slightest pressure; and the lid removed, a spectacle was unfolded, which, considering the fame of the mighty dead, has rarely been witnessed by a single human being. There, were the remains of the great poet, to all appearance nearly entire, and retaining various traces of vitality, or rather exhibiting the features of one who had newly sunk into the sleep of death – the lordly forehead, arched and high - the scalp still covered with hair, and the teeth perfectly firm and white. The scene was so imposing, that most of the workmen stood bare and uncovered, as the late Dr Gregory did at the exhumation of the remains of the illustrious hero of Bannockburn, and at the same time felt their frames thrilling with some un-definable emotion, as they gazed on the ashes of him whose fame is as wide as the world itself. But the effect was momentary, for when they proceeded to insert a shell or case below the coffin, the head separated from the trunk, and the whole body, with the exception of the bones, crumbled into dust. Phrenology, at that time, had not become fashionable, or rather was cultivated under a different name, and as no such opportunity can occur again, it is perhaps to be regretted that no cast was taken of the head for the benefit of the admirers of that science. 
After the whole remains had been carefully collected, they were placed in a new coffin, prepared for their reception, and buried in the vault close to the coffins of the two boys, and over the whole was placed the original tombstone, referred to above. The vault was then closed, and though thousands on thousands have since visited an edifice that is tastefully enclosed, well executed, and which, including the sculpture, was erected at an expense of not less than £1,500 sterling, has never been re-opened since that day. 

