It is very generally believed that the members of the medical profession are a party concerned, and that they have an interest beyond that which others have, in obtaining greater facilities of dissection. This is true as far as it relates to the teachers of anatomy and the students; but the former are very few in number, and the latter are not of sufficient importance, and are too limited in their acquaintance and connexion for their sentiments to be much regarded, or even to be known. It is not true as to medical practitioners generally. They have laid in their store of knowledge. They rarely find it necessary to return to the labours of the dissecting-room; or if they wish to inspect the dead body for the purpose of satisfying themselves as to a particular point, they have ample opportunities of doing so in the post-mortem examinations made for the purpose of ascertaining the cause of a patient's death.
If the existing race of medical practitioners were so narrowminded as to consult only their own private interests, they would be pleased to see the rising generation brought up in comparative ignorance, inasmuch as it would make it more difficult for themselves to be superseded in their practice as they advance in years. If they have been more active than others in calling the attention of the legislature to the subject, it has been on purely public grounds; not because they expect, or can expect, any benefit to themselves, but because their peculiar situation makes them more competent than other individuals can be, to form a judgment of the mischiefs which may ultimately arise to the community, if nothing be done to remove the existing evil.
The accompanying papers are selected for republication, from various sources, with the view of directing attention to the following points:
1st. The paramount importance of anatomy.
2d. The evils attendant on the present mode of supplying the dissecting-rooms.
3d. The means by which such evils may be remedied, without outraging public feeling.
1. It is hardly necessary to point out the importance of anatomical knowledge, as a foundation of those means by which human suffering is relieved. The great improvements in surgery and medicine have been coeval in all times, and in every country, with the facilities afforded for dissection. Whenever these have been withheld, the power of alleviating the sufferings of our kind has been proportionally diminished. Instead of solid truths, vague and imperfect theories have served to guide medical judgments, and human misery has been fearfully increased by human ignorance. The history of medicine, from the era of Galen to that of Harvey, proves this to be no exaggerated statement. The false or imperfect notions which regulated the practice of the elder members of our art, warped the judgments of their successors, and extended their pernicious influence to the very threshold of our own times. To say that these notions have been removed by the diligent prosecution of anatomy, is almost to utter the truism, that the diseases of the body have been better treated as the structures of the body affected by them have been better studied; or, in other words, that the disorders of the machine have been best remedied by those who have understood its workings and its construction best.
2. The evils attendant on the present system of supplying the dissecting-rooms, arise from two sources: 1st, from the illegality of the mode of supply; and 2dly, from the insufficiency of the supply. It is well known that the dissecting-rooms are almost wholly supplied with bodies which have been unlawfully disinterred. The immediate effect on society of such repulsive means of procuring subjects for dissection, is to degrade and brutalise a portion of the community, and to foster its existence in this state. It was proved in the House of Commons, before the select committee on anatomy, that upwards of two hundred persons were employed in London as exhumators; that the horror which their occupations inspired, necessarily kept them apart from the rest of the community, and forced them to eke out their means of subsistence by thieving; thus preparing them for the commission of the most atrocious crimes. It was also adduced in evidence, before the same committee, that the evil extended its influence to another portion of the public in another mode. The solicitude for the dead, and the horror of exhumation being such, as to induce “individuals of late to dispense with the laws of their country, and to fire upon parties attempting disinterment.” Thus have the laws been infringed, no less by those whose good feelings prompted them to watch the remains of the dead, than by those who, from criminal motives, molested them.
The increasing demand for bodies, arising from the increasing number of medical students, and the increasing sense of the necessity of anatomical knowledge, has necessarily raised their price, and this has been further augmented by the risks incurred in exhuming them. “The effect of interpreting and executing the laws with increasing rigour, has been not to suppress exhumation, but to raise the price of bodies, and increase the number of exhumators.” (Report on Anatomy, p. 8.). The money thus obtainable, has acted in two instances, within three years, as a premium to murder, under circumstances of unparalleled atrocity; and there is reason to fear, that so long as the same causes operate, crimes similar to those of Burke and Bishop, will continue to be perpetrated; probably with more caution and art, and therefore with diminished chance of detection.
Not only are our Anatomical Schools supplied by means which foster crime, but the supply even thus obtained is insufficient for the purposes of medical knowledge and the discharge of a great duty towards the public. It was proved before the Anatomical Committee that each student, during the term of his studentship, dissects on an average only one body annually - a proportion wholly insufficient for the purposes of complete education. Nine tenths of these individuals practise Surgery as well as Medicine; and to them, thus imperfectly educated, the lives of the community must necessarily be entrusted. They supply our army, navy, and our colonies; they are located in our large provincial towns; the health of the rural population is consigned to their charge: they ‘farm’ our workhouses, and become the medical attendants of our country dispensaries, hospitals, and jails. If in these responsible stations many among them have vindicated their character for science, it has been by patient industry, by experience acquired late and painfully, in the absence of all encouragement, and at the hazard of legal punishment. Nevertheless, it cannot be doubted that, as a class, they have not been permitted to acquire that degree of knowledge, which greater facilities for dissection would have ensured to their well-known zeal and industry. Hence our criminal courts annually exhibit the humiliating spectacle of practitioners unprepared for the ordinary exigencies of surgical practice, punished for ignorance, by a legislature which prevents them from acquiring knowledge.
3. But admitting the existence of these evils, - how are they to be remedied? Some have advocated the importation of bodies from abroad. Not to mention that this source of supply may be stopped by war, the plan which has been partially adopted failed, from the bodies on their arrival in this country being unfit for the purposes of dissection. Others would abolish dissections altogether, and would have Anatomy taught by means of models and diagrams. This plan would not only render Anatomical science stationary, but it would be as impossible to become a skilful operator by inspecting plans and models, as to be a skilful mechanic by looking at the adze and plane. The tools must be used; the practical dexterity must be acquired on the dead before the Surgeon shall venture to touch a single fibre of the living frame. The public know nothing of the intense anxiety and thought with which even our best tried hospital Surgeons approach the capital operations of Surgery; they hear of nothing but the facility with which the operation is performed, and do not appreciate the patient study, the long habit of dissection, the unceasing labour, the slow steps by which that dexterity has been acquired.
Others again would supply the dissecting room with the body of the executed murderer and the suicide. It is doubtful even if both these sources of supply were resorted to, whether they would be adequate to the demand: but with regard to the bodies of suicides, it is probable that not a single one would be used for dissection. Friends would seek to inter the remains, and there is not an Anatomical teacher in the kingdom who would not shrink from aggravating their distress by a refusal.
Others again would send our students to foreign schools to acquire their knowledge. But these may not always be open to them, and even if they were, a vast majority have neither the time nor the money to resort to them.
There is but one effectual remedy for the evil now operating so injuriously on the public; and that is, to give up the unclaimed dead for the benefit and use of the living. Dissection is no evil to the corpse, and if there be no kindred nor friends, no injury can be inflicted on the living.
It may be said that the apprehension of being dissected might have an injurious influence on those who are conscious that if they die, they have no friends to protect their remains. To such an objection the conclusive answer is: Let every person have the power of forbidding the dissection of his body.
Let public feeling be respected, - let every barrier be opposed to wanton aggression on its prejudices; by such proceedings the cause of science cannot fail to be strengthened, and the wishes of its cultivators consulted. For the purposes of guarding against the possibility of wounding the feelings of even a single living being, let it be enacted:
1. That no dissection shall take place if the individual has declared, in writing, or orally before two witnesses, his wish to the contrary.
2. That no dissection shall take place if an objection be made by a single relation or friend.
3. That no dissection shall take place on the body of a stranger or traveller who has died in this country.
4. That the funeral service shall be read over the bodies of those to be given up to dissection, and that the remains shall receive Christian burial within a given time.
In order to protect the public from the hazard of crimes similar to those of Bishop and Burke, let it be enacted:
1. That no dissection be carried on except in a place licensed for the purpose by the Secretary of State or the Magistrates at the Quarter Sessions.
2. That a register be kept of everybody dissected, stating from whence it has been obtained, &c.
3. That nobody be dissected except there be a medical certificate stating the cause of death.
To a plan thus conducted, no reasonable objection, it is hoped, can be made. It has been in practice in every kingdom of the continent, and is now introduced into the United States. It is true that some have felt that it is unworthy of a free nation, whose laws are made equally for high and low, that the poor and friendless should be dissected, while those who leave kindred and property are consigned to a quiet grave; but let us take the answer from an admirable essay on our subject, written by the late Dr Gooch.
“This view of the subject may produce some effect on the mind, but it will not bear examination. It is a sentimental sophism - an extension of that compassion which is properly directed to the living and sentient man, to his lifeless and insensible remains - his skin, muscles, blood-vessels, and bones. The instant the dead body is considered, as it ought to be, as a mere assemblage of insensible fibres, the sophism must vanish, together with its influence. The poor and friendless man is not more poor and friendless in the grave, than he who during life was surrounded by relatives, “clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day”. Death levels all distinctions: the dead pauper and the dead prince are on a par; a poor and friendless corpse is as much a figure of speech as a wealthy and befriended one."
We may add, from evidence before the anatomical committee, that it is precisely the poorer classes whose bodies are now disinterred and with this aggravation, that surviving friends, under the present state of things, can never feel secure that the remains of the dead are to be left unmolested.
In conclusion, let us state that the evils mentioned, fall exclusively on the non-medical part of the community. It is of little consequence to medical men, in a pecuniary point of view, whether as a class, they are permitted to be well or ill-educated, however grateful it may be to them to have the and the consciousness of real knowledge. Human nature in its sufferings will always resort to human aid for succour. Whether that shall be administered by incompetent advisers, and unskilful operators, or by competent physicians and expert surgeons, depends on the public to choose.
ROBERT FERGUSON, M.D.
