 One of the St. Patricks from Ireland - known as St. Patrick senior - A.D. 435, here [Glastonbury Abbey] gathered the first regular congregation of monks. Here likewise he lived thirty years as a monk, and he was buried on the north side of the altar. Here, also, died and was interred the renowned King Arthur - said to have been St. David's nephew - on the 21st of May, A.D. 542. According to a bardic tradition, Speed relates, that his body was deposited between two Pyramids, standing in the churchyard of Glastonbury. King Henry II. of England caused the ground to be dug, and at seven foot depth was found a huge broad stone, wherein a Leaden Cross was fastened, and in that side that lay downward, in rude and barbarous letters (as rudely set and contrived) this inscription written upon that side of the Lead that was towards the stone.
There is an engraving of this lead cross, with an inscription, in very ancient lettering, given: Hic jacet sepultus inclitus REX ARTURIUS IN INSULA AVALONIA ['Here lies buried the famous King Arthur on Avalon Island']. The cross of lead and its inscription had been long preserved in the Treasury or Register of Glastonbury church, until the time of Henry VIII., according to Stowe. The body of Queen Gueneuer, Arthur's wife, was found beside his own. Both were enclosed in the trunk of a Tree, nine feet below the "huge broad stone." Ten wounds were traceable on the skull of King Arthur. Finely platted tresses, in colour like gold, remained on the queen's skull. On being touched, these latter turned into dust. Of this exhumation, Giraldus Cam-
brensis was an eye-witness. "The bones of King Arthur and of Queen Guineuer, his wife, by the direction of Henry de Bloys, Nephew to King Henry the Second, and Abbot of Glastenbury, at that present, were translated into the great new church, and there in a fair Tomb of Marble, his body was laid, and his Queen’s at his feet; which noble Monument among the fatally wound might be healed. Here he died, and was buried in the cemetery of the monks, during summer, and about the feast of Pentecost. His queen Guenevera was interred beside him. We are told, they rested in their grave for 648 years, when their remains were afterwards removed to the larger church. Immediately before the death of Arthur, in 542, he is said to have bequeathed his British crown to a kinsman, named Constantine, son to Cador, chief of Cornubia. 
