
Another grave was situated in the north aisle of the choir [Hereford Cathedral] immediately opposite to Bishop Stanbury's monument. The stone which covered it had been carved, or rather etched, in lines, apparently representing an ecclesiastic in robes, but the constant wear of those who for centuries passed over it, had almost obliterated the whole, and at that time it was not found practicable to decipher the inscription which remained from the position of the stone. At about two feet from the surface the progress of the workmen was impeded by the obstruction caused by a very large and thick stone which covered the whole extent of the grave, and was cemented down with a very tenacious mortar. It was, however, determined to ascertain the contents of this tomb, and, accordingly, after considerable difficulty, the stone was raised, when the first object which met the eye was a chalice and paten of pewter, having on the top of it the decomposed remains of a square silk covering, upon which had been placed a taper in the form of a cross, partially burnt at each of the four ends, and exhibiting still the remains of the wicks.
On taking off the top of the chalice, there was observable a mark round the sides, near the bottom, which had evidently been caused by the evaporation of the consecrated fluid it had contained. It was placed near the right shoulder of a skeleton, which was tolerably perfect. The hands had been placed over the breast in the attitude of prayer, but the ligaments had long since deserted the bones, and they had collapsed in a confused heap upon the breast, which had been decorated with a plaiting of gold lace, surrounded by an embroidered band, part of which is now produced, and which had passed round the neck. Another piece of broader gold lace extended from this at right angles down to the feet, and in some places yet adhered to the fragile remains of a silken texture, which, though now brown, had once been evidently black, and which had descended to the feet. These were covered on the upper part with the leather of shoes, the soles of which were gone, although the holes of the stitches which had connected them were still visible.
In this case it was evident that no coffin of any kind had contained the body, from the still visible mark which had been left on the side of the grave by the pressure of the arm giving the outline of its form when shrouded.
The hair was perfect, as were also the finger-nails, which were remarkable from the filbert-like form which they retained, and the precision with which they seemed to have been cut. But the presence of the taper is the most striking feature in this instance, which to me is unique.

