The circumstance which gave rise to this communication was the discovery of two lead coffins; which from their position were considered to contain the remains of some of the family of the founder, William de Albini. [Wymondham Abbey] 
This discovery was made on the eve of last Christmas Day, in enlarging the churchyard; the present Vicar, the Rev. William Papillon, having granted to the parish a portion of the abbey grounds for that purpose. In consequence 
Account of some Discoveries made of receiving information of the discovery of these remains, I went over; and from the nature of the operations, suggested the propriety of laying open the foundations, towards obtaining a fair plan of this religious establishment.
 
Discovery and opening of the Lead Coffins is recorded a similar disinterment made in February 1772, at the abbey of Bury St. Edmund's. It was supposed, from some circumstances, to have been the remains of Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter, who died in 1428.
In the progress of levelling this ground the labourers came upon a flagstone, covering a brick grave, which, on inspection, was found to contain two lead cases, the largest of which was six feet two inches long; the other, which was placed at its side, measured only sixteen inches and a quarter. The spot where these were found is precisely in the middle of the quire, and within about eight feet of its east end; consequently, somewhere about the foot of the altar. The lead was in both instances in one piece; cut in such a manner that the sides, when brought over the body or its envelopes, would just meet in the centre of the upper part, where it had been soldered from the head to the feet; two pieces at the head and feet were brought up in like manner, which thus constituted the cases. The smaller one was perfectly air-tight and dry within; but the larger one had, by the falling of a portion of the stone which covered it, been broken, and become pervious to the air and moisture. It appears that this grave had been opened about twenty years before; but that the parties opening it considered it unsafe, from the presence of foul air, and that it was again covered up. The fracture in the coffin is believed to have been made at that time. This fracture was over the left femur, the integuments, &c. of which were quite decomposed. On inquiry if there was any appearance of the lead cases having been enclosed in wood, I was informed that no vestiges of such had been found, excepting some nails; but these were at too great a distance to have had any connection with the lead cases. The Rev. Mr. Jackal informs me, that in soldering up the large case two rows of holes were found in the underside, evidently made by fastening two transverse pieces of wood to it; most probably for the purpose of removal at the second interment.
On their discovery they were placed in the church, and a few days after were opened, in the presence of the minister, churchwardens, the medical gentlemen of the town, Mr. John Dalrymple, of New Broad Street, London, (who conducted the examination), and other gentlemen, to the number of about sixty persons. The large case had a horizontal slit cut on the right side, and in turning over the lead, the body appeared in the form of a mummy, five feet nine inches long, covered with a thin light-brown composition (of a mineral and vegetable nature) which readily fell off in flakes. On examining some of these flakes previous to my seeing the coffins, I discovered upon them the remains of a minute coleopterous insect, which proved to be the Cerylon hysteroides of Latreille. On uncovering the body, a number of small white maggots, probably the larvæ of this Cerylon, were moving about in all directions. These insects live under the bark of trees, and the only way of accounting for their presence is, that the eggs were deposited with the bark used in preserving the body, and that, from the perfect exclusion of air, they had lain dormant until the coffin was fractured, as before stated. Mr. Dalrymple has published a Report of his examination, with an engraving of the remains, in the Quarterly Medical Journal for October 1834. The cerecloth next appeared, secured round the body with tolerable stout cord. The gentlemen who undertook to develop the body, began at the chest, and opened the cerecloth downwards with considerable difficulty; the whole of this part was in a semi fluid state. The first part of the body exposed was the left hand, and from the delicate formation of the bones, it was immediately pronounced to be the body of a female; this was further corroborated by the inspection of the pelvis. On continuing the section, it was found that the bones of the feet were bent down; making the body appear much longer than in reality, which, on accurate measurement, was found to be four feet eleven inches. A portion of the cerecloth was next removed from the face, when a fine set of young teeth were exhibited. The external membranes of the eyes were also seen stretched over the sockets, and upon examination it was discovered that the eyes had not been removed. The hair, probably originally auburn, had a reddish tinge: and from its being found folded up on the right side of the head, the medical gentlemen were of opinion that it had been detached prior to interment. In the pelvis was discovered a whitish substance, which was at first considered to have been the bladder, but on further examination, there was found within it a small quantity of tow, which at once determined it to have been the uterus, and identified this female to have been the mother of the foetus contained in the smaller case. 
This case was also cut open on the side, and on removing the lead there was found an envelope of linen, firmly cemented by rosin, and secured by a cord passed in succession round, looped in front, and tied at the foot like a sack. The envelope was so strong, that it was with great difficulty a longitudinal section was made in it with a saw, when a strong perfume issued from the in. closure, arising from the cumin seed with which it was filled.ᵐ From the perfect state of this seed (its interior presenting a natural and fleshy appearance) I had hoped that the vital principle was not extinct, and that it would have germinated; but the attempts to raise it by numerous individuals have (as far as my inquiries have gone) proved ineffectual. After removing a considerable quantity of this seed, a further envelope was discovered, which was also opened; when amongst coarse-grained muriate of soda, cumin, coriander, and other seeds and fragments of odoriferous wood, was found a foetus of about the fourth month. 
Thus it appeared, that these remains were those of a female who had died in the early stage of pregnancy, and also that the lady was of high rank, from the expense and care bestowed on her remains. From the total absence of any mark on the envelopes, or remains of costume or ornament about the bodies, it is extremely difficult to determine to whom these remains may be referred, nor are we assisted in our inquiries by an examination of Blomefield, Tanner, Weaver, Dugdale, &c. It is evident, however, that the quire, where these bodies were found, was under the especial care of the religious of the Abbey, and it is also highly improbable that they would allow any female to be interred there, except the ladies of the founder or his descendants. We may therefore venture to conclude, from the state of the interment, the spot, and its evident antiquity, that the female thus discovered, must have been nearly allied to or descended from the founder, William de Albini, who died in the year 1156. 
Other Interments. 
On removing the rubbish from the east cloister, the labourers came upon the lids of two stone coffins, the east ends of which were under the masonry of the entrance of the chapterhouse. These were uncovered on Monday, January 13, in the presence of Hudson Gurney and John Gage, Esquires, the Rev. George Peacock, of Trinity College, Cambridge, and several other gentlemen, and were found to contain the remains of two monks, each having been covered with a piece of very coarse woollen cloth. One of the skeletons was perfect; but no vestige of dress or ornament appeared, except the woollen cloth abovementioned. The coffins were of Caen stone, and hollowed out to receive the head and shoulders of the defunct. The lids were slightly elevated in the middle, and in the bottom of the coffins was a hole made to drain off the moisture from the body. These interments were considered to be of about the commencement of the fifteen century. 





