THE SEPULCHRAL REMAINS AND EFFIGIES IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF WORCESTER. 
Matthew Paris states that King John on his deathbed, in the castle at Newark, being asked by the Abbot of Croxton where he would be buried, exclaimed: ‘I commend my soul to God, my body to Saint Wolstan'. The same writer proceeds to tell us of his burial: 'his body, attired in royal apparel, was conveyed to Worcester, and honourably buried in the cathedral church by the bishop of that place'. Matthew Paris then informs us how the corruptible corpse was conveyed to such a distance: ‘the Abbot of the canons of Croxton being well skilled in medicine, and at that time the physician of the king, anatomically opened the royal body that it might be the more readily conveyed, and, having sprinkled the bowels copiously with salt, caused them to be removed to his own abbey and there honourably buried'. A somewhat similar mode of attempting to preserve the body from immediate corruption, by means of salt, is stated by Matthew Paris to have taken place previous to the burial of Henry I, who died in 1135. He relates that the bowels, brains, and eyes of the deceased monarch were taken out and inhumed at Roan, the body was then cut and gashed, and sprinkled with salt, after which it was enclosed in bulls' hides; in that state it was brought to England, and buried at Reading Abbey. The body of Geoffry de Magnaville, who died at Chester in 1165, is also recorded to have been salted and wrapped in leather for burial. 
On July 20, 1797, on the commencement of some repairs in the Cathedral, it was proposed to remove the tomb of King John, which occupied the same position as at the present time; a stone coffin was discovered at the bottom of the tomb, level with the pavement; this coffin was cut out of Higley stone, and only covered with two elm boards. On examining the coffin, it was found to contain the remains of the king; some portions of the royal apparel were firm in texture, but the colour was gone; part of the sword and leathern sheath were lying on the left side, but much moldered. The boots were more perfect. Part of one of the robes appeared to have been embroidered; the head was covered with a close-fitting skullcap, which appeared to have been buckled under the chin. A quantity of a substance resembling white paste lay on and below the abdomen, which it was supposed had been poured into the body when the intestines were taken out; this was, I think, the salt of which Matthew Paris speaks, used for preserving the body. It is hardly to be doubted that the corpse of the king had been arrayed in apparel of the same description as that exhibited on his effigy, which originally formed the cover to the stone coffin. 
On May 7, 1856, the workmen engaged on the repairs in the Cathedral, whilst excavating at the foot of the south-west buttress of the south-east transept, discovered two stone coffins containing skeletons unusually perfect, and apparently in the exact position in which the bodies had been originally deposited. Both coffins contained the remains of men of large stature, the one measuring 6 feet 6 inches in height. The coffin first discovered was 5 feet below the surface, and 2 feet 9 inches from the base of the buttress, the lower end pointing about 4 degrees northward of east. It was roughly hewn out of a block of sandstone similar to that of which the ancient walls of the Cathedral are constructed, and with a recess or cavity, in the shape of a dovetail, formed for the head. There was no cover to this coffin. This coffin measures 7 ft. long, 2 ft. 4 in. wide at the head, and 2 ft. wide at the lower end. The sides are 5 in. in thickness, and inside it is 11 in, deep; there is an orifice at the bottom, about the middle. There is another coffin in the crypt, hewn out of a single block of stone, 7 ft. 2 in. long, 2 ft. in width at the top, diminishing to 14 in. in width at the foot, 13 in. deep inside, and the sides worked to 3 1/2 in. in thickness, with a square recess for the head. It may have contained the remains of one of the bishops, and have been surmounted by one of the recumbent effigies now lying in the Cathedral. The other coffin, and apparently the most ancient, was of much ruder workmanship, being constructed of several small blocks roughly worked, with the cavity for the head formed in three pieces. This coffin had a covering of several rough stone slabs. The lower part was embedded in the masonry of the buttress. It contained a skeleton of larger stature than that previously described. 
These coffins, with their contents, were carefully removed, and placed in the north-west corner of the crypt, where there is also another stone coffin, and there they now remain. 
The most important discovery, however, remains to be noticed. In December, 1861, the workmen employed in removing a part of the wall on the north side of the choir, near the east end, discovered a stone coffin, a portion of which fell away, disclosing the remains of one of the bishops in his episcopal vestments. In consequence of a communication made to me by my friend Mr. Perkins, the architect of the cathedral, I went down to Worcester on January 1st, 1862, and by the kindness of the Dean I was afforded every facility in examining these remains. It was, however, a task under difficulties, as the coffin had not been removed, and was still to some extent embedded in the wall. Though now broken, this coffin appeared to have been of the shape prevalent in the thirteenth century, formed with great care out of a single block, more elaborately hollowed and worked with greater finish than we usually find in objects of this kind. This coffin had, I think, been originally covered by one of the recumbent effigies now in the cathedral, and which I shall hereafter notice. The effigy had, however, been long removed, and replaced by three stones. 
Like the remains of King John, this was not the first time that the interment had been disclosed. From the removal of the stones covering the upper and lower extremities of the coffin, the remains in those parts had been somewhat disturbed, the lower end being partly filled with rubbish. The skull of the bishop had fallen on the right side, and the vestments covering the upper part of the body appeared reduced to shreds, changed to a chocolate colour. The vestments covering the middle of the body, being protected by the central stone, were undisturbed, and the outline and folds of the chasuble could be clearly traced. It was, however, difficult to obtain a correct view without the aid of a light, which was speedily procured for me by Mr. Perkins and placed in the coffin under the middle stone. The lower part of the coffin was to some extent cleared of the rubbish during my examination; but this had occasioned some disarrangement in the vestments, so that it was difficult to distinguish them with precision. The body had apparently been vested in the alb, tunic, dalmatic, chasuble, and stole, with the amiss about the neck, the mitre on the head, and the maniple suspended from the left arm. Of the mitre, the lower portion, constituting a band round the forehead, was still apparent. A small silver-gilt ornament, not unlike a morse [plaque], appeared to have been attached to the chasuble in front of the breast: this I consider to have been the pectoral or rationale. The pastoral staff had doubtless been placed on the left side of the body, but neither crook nor ferule [iron rod] could be discovered. Some fragments, however, of ivory were found, which appeared to have been portions of the crook. The vestments were exceedingly rich, of gold tissue decorated with scrolls and other ornaments, such as figures of kings and birds, in that particular conventional style which prevailed during the middle of the thirteenth century. Neither the episcopal ring nor the chalice, both of which it was customary to bury with the corpse of a bishop, could be found. These may have been taken away when these remains were previously disturbed and the effigy which covered them removed. But a silver-gilt paten in perfect preservation, measuring about 4 5/8 inches in diameter, was found in the coffin. 
But to what bishop are we to ascribe the remains thus discovered at Worcester? I have no hesitation in stating my belief that they are those of Walter de Cantilupe, who presided over the see from 1236 to 1266. He was one of the great men of his time - one who took an active part in public affairs. A long account of him appears in a chronicle written perhaps within fifty years of his death, and entitled The Chronicle of Worcester for the Year of our Lord 1308'. [Chronicon Wigorniense a Christo ad annum 1308] This narration has been published in Wharton's Anglia Sacra, and thence Dr. Thomas derived his account of this prelate. The chronicle informs us that, early in the year 1265-6 (in February), the venerable Walter de Cantilupe Bishop of Worcester, of pious memory, died at his manor of Blockley and was buried with great pomp in his cathedral church, near the high altar. 
On comparing the dimensions of the stone coffin containing the remains of this bishop with those of the slab on which is sculptured the recumbent effigy of a bishop, that lying southernmost at the east end of the Lady Chapel, I find them so exactly to correspond that I have no hesitation in concluding that the effigy formed the original cover to the coffin. 
The last of the sepulchral remains which I have to notice as brought to light in Worcester Cathedral, is a leaden coffin found about the same time as the remains of Bishop Cantilupe, within the rails at the east end of the choir. This coffin was moulded to the shape of the body, and it exhibited, to a certain degree, marks of the features and limbs, with a mask over the face, and the arms and legs visibly portrayed. The body had evidently been embalmed and wrapped in cere-cloth, and the leaden coffin had been encased in an outer chest of wood which had fallen into decay, but fragments were still apparent. The clamps of iron which appear to have fastened the wooden coffin, and the iron handles, were preserved, but they did not exhibit any distinctive marks of ornamentation. A small javelin head of the seventeenth century was found with or near these remains. The leaden coffin measured 6 feet 4 inches in length. It lay at no great depth, as the crown of the arch of the crypt beneath would prevent the formation of a deep grave. Though without any inscription to denote whose remains these were, there can be no doubt that this coffin contains the embalmed body of William Duke of Hamilton, who was mortally wounded at the battle of Worcester in 1651, and shortly after died in or near Worcester. His body was not allowed to be conveyed to the family burial place at Hamilton in Scotland, but was here interred. The exact spot of his interment is not laid down in the plan of the Cathedral in Dr. Thomas' Survey in 1734, nor in that given in Britton's History, but, in the plan published in Green's History of Worcester, in 1795, his grave is indicated on the platform at the upper end of the choir, just within the rails. Green says that In a space included between the distances of ten and thirteen feet from the north side wall of the altar, and one foot within its enclosure, the body of William Duke of Hamilton, slain at the battle of Worcester in 1651, lies interred.' Green gives as his authority a paper in the Chapter archives of Worcester, indorsed--'Where to find the several Graves of those that lye buried within the Rails at the altar, before it was paved by Mr. William Thorneburry, the then Treasurer of the College of Worcester. William Thornborough was a prebendary of Worcester from 1660 to 1680. Recent measurement shows that the spot where this coffin was found is situated, as stated by Green, between 10 and 13 ft. from the north wall. 
Bishop Burnet, in his memoir of James and William Dukes of Hamilton, published in 1677, observes of this Duke William: The wound which occasioned the death of the Duke of Hamilton was received in one of his legs, a little below the knee, by a slug shot, which shattered the bone so fatally as wholly to disable him from keeping the field, and he was forced to retire into the town, where he fell into the enemies hands in the evening of the day of battle. His body was interred before the high altar in the cathedral church of Worcester; notwithstanding he had by his will ordered that it might be buried with his ancestors at Hamilton.' 
Leaden coffins very similar to that of the Duke of Hamilton, and of the middle of the seventeenth century, are mentioned by Gough in the introduction to his work on sepulchral monuments, in which he says: In the vault under the chapel of Farleigh Castle, Wilts, were seven lead coffins much resembling Egyptian mummies, having all the features of a face in strong relief, and the bodies gradually tapering from the shoulders to the feet.' Amongst these were coffins containing the remains of Sir Edward and lady Margaret Hungerford, 1648. 
In the interment of Prince Arthur in Worcester Cathedral, in 1502, we find from a contemporaneous MS. published by Heron in his additions to Leland's Collectanea, that the corpse was coyled, well seared, and conveniently dressed with spices and other sweet stuff, such as those that bore the chardge thereof could purvey, and that it might be furnished of. This was so sufficiently done, that it needed not lead, but was chested. The chest was covered with a good black cloth, close sewed to the same, with a white cross and sufficient rings of iron to the same.' The body, on being conveyed from Ludlow to Worcester, was placed in the quire under the hearse, which' (says the writer, who appears to have been an eye-witness, perhaps one of the heralds or officers of arms who officially attended the funeral) 'was the goodliest and best wrought and garnished that ever I saw.' After the religious ceremonies, which were very long, 'gentlemen took up the corpse and bare it to the grave at the south end of the high altar of that cathedral church, where were all the divine services. Then the corpse, with weeping and sore lamentation, was laid in the grave. The orisons were said by the Bishop of Lincoln, also sore weeping. He set the cross over the chest and cast holy water and earth thereon. His officer of arms, sore weeping, took of his coat of arms and cast it along over the chest right lamentably. Then Sir William Ovedall, comptroller of his household, sore weeping and crying, took the staff of his office by both ends, and over his own head brake it, and cast it into the grave. In likewise did Sir Richard Croft, steward of his household, and cast his staff broken into the grave. In likewise did the Gentlemen Ushers their rods. This was a piteous sight to those who beheld it.'— (Leland's Collect., vol. v. p. 374.) 
