In the year 1812, the remains of Bishop Stanley were exhumed. This was accomplished, not by removing the tomb, but by excavating the ground on the north side of it, and by removing the soil beneath the tomb; and at the depth of a yard and a quarter below the surface of the floor, the remains of the bishop were discovered, lying on his back, with his head towards the west, and his arms crossed and folded over his breast. On the skeleton being removed, and placed on the floor of the small chapel, it was found to measure upwards of six feet four inches in length, which verifies the description given of him by the old rhyming biographer of the house of Stanley.
"A goodly tall man as was in all England,
And sped well all matters that he took in hand."
Metrical History of the House of Stanley.
The body was not enclosed in lead, or any other metallic substance, nothing was found but the dust of decayed timber lying on each side of the skeleton, and above the bones a horizontal line of a dark colour, marked the line of the coffin lid: no remnants were discovered of either a dalmatic, a chausible, or a vestment; nor yet the fragments of a patine, a chalice, or any other insignia of episcopal dignity. The bones were in a good state of preservation, except some of the dorsal vertebræ, which were decayed: of the cranium, the frontal bones, with the exception of the ossa maxillaria, were deficient; but the os occipitis was perfect, of a large size, but remarkably thin. The thigh bone was exactly twenty inches long, and if we multiply its length four times, which is the general criterion of the anatomist, the bishop must have measured six feet eight inches in
height. Having surveyed the remnants of this great benefactor of the church, till their curiosity was satisfied, and having written the figures 1812 on the inside of the skull, the bones were carefully restored again to the tomb in which they had reposed for nearly three centuries.
Many of these remarks are the result of our own observation, when we saw the tomb opened on the 21st of March 1831, to ascertain the contents of a paper, which the Rev. Mr Wray (who opened the sepulchre in 1812,) imagined he had deposited within the skull of its inmate, detailing the circumstances of the disinterment; but nothing was found except the date above alluded to, and the bones in the state we have described. The remaining observations were communicated to us by the Rev. C. D. Wray, who, after the death of Mr Ethelstone, was elected, on the 6th of October 1830, to succeed him in the Fellowship.
