It is remarkable that in the face of this metrical account of the interment of the Bishop of Ely in Manchester [Cathedral], which was written by a contemporary, and a kinsman, and of a large monumental tomb erected to his memory, antiquaries should have persisted in maintaining that he was buried in the Cathedral Church of Ely. But this question (if it ought ever to have been called one) has been completely set aside by the recent disinterment of the Bishop, a memorandum of which, taken on the spot, is given literatim: MEM. The tomb of James Stanley, fourth warden of Manchester College, and Bishop of Ely, was opened on the 15th of June 1812, in the presence of the Reverend C. D. Wray, and Mr Thomas Barritt.
"In order to ascertain whether the body was buried in the tomb above ground, the west corner stone of the tomb was carefully removed, when the tomb was found to be solid, filled up in the middle with stones and mortar, well cemented together. Going then into the little chapel, a hole was made in the ground close to the middle of the tomb, when about a yard below, and under the tomb, a skeleton was found lying at length, consisting of the two thigh-bones, (twenty inches long,) the four leg-bones, the large leg-bone, sixteen inches long, the two hip-bones, the arm-bones complete, the os sacrum, the skull decayed on one side, the toe and finger bones nearly complete. Above the body was found large quantities of stones, as if for a foundation for the tomb. The body was laid, not quite under the middle of the tomb, but more on the left side, rather more within the little chapel. The head lay about twelve or fourteen inches out, from under the west end of the tomb, i.e. the tomb has not completely covered the body. The feet reached to the bottom of the brass plate, which has the inscription on. The Bishop, I should judge from his bones, must have been six feet high. A black mark was perceptible in the ground in the shape of a coffin, which was evidently the decayed wood, - oak probably. "Two large flat stones or flags formed the bottom of the tomb. The fingers were found close to the shoulders and head, which proves that his arms were laid
across."
