On the Depositions of the Remains of Katherine de Valois, Queen of Henry V., in Westminster Abbey. By the Very Rev. Arthur PENRHYN STANLEY, D.D., Dean of Westminster, F.R.S., F.S.A. 
[ January 31, 1878.] 
It is curious that in the early part of the last century this interesting chapel [Chantry of Henry V] was left in the midst of the Abbey, so neglected, unexplored, and almost unknown, that Dart, writing about 1723, says: —'There was likewise a chauntry founded in this church for the soul of Henry V, which his son, Henry VI, endowed with land. This chauntry is over the chapel in which that prince lies buried, wherein they tell us is his shield and sword, and other warlike furniture. It is not unlikely the altar there may be still standing, being so obscure a place as might likely pass the notice of the reformers, having two ascents to it, one on each side the iron screen. But I could not satisfy my curiosity in this respect, being informed that the sacrist some years since dying suddenly in the night the key was lost, and the choir have never since had one made to it.' Dart subsequently adds, 'By the help of a ladder I have -- since writing that -- scaled the walls of this chauntry chapel. On the inside of those walls are presses of wainscot, with shelves and folding doors, very neat. There are in all six, viz. four each side, i.e., the lining of these side walls; and on each side of the altar is one smaller. The altar is ascended by two steps; one crosses the chapel from the extremes of the side presses, and the other nearer the altar, which is broken away. The places where it was fastened to the wall are visible.' 
The chantry has undergone several changes since that time, but it is only quite recently that, in the general improvements of the Abbey, attention was called to a slab in the floor, which upon examination proved to be that belonging to the old altar described by Dart as broken away. The five crosses upon it were distinctly visible. It was doubtless this table of the altar of the Enunciation that was first placed in the chapel of relics at the entrance to the Lady Chapel of King Henry III. When King Henry VI erected the tomb and this chantry to the memory of his father King Henry V it was made the altar-table of this chantry. When the Reformation came, the altar was removed and partly destroyed, but the table was made part of the floor, when several of the ancient tiles were removed in order to receive it, and there it has remained for more than three centuries. Its edges were found to be moulded as for an altar-table; it had not been deliberately destroyed, but it appeared that after it had been placed on the floor it had been broken into twenty pieces by the action of fire, of which the marks still remain. When this was done is quite unknown; possibly in the disorders of the great Civil War; more probably on the occasion of the lighting of some fire for warmth or cooking during the long hours of one of the coronations. 
The restoration of this altar-slab to its proper place suggested the suitableness of this spot for the resting-place of one who was specially connected with this chapel, and whose remains by a series of strange misfortunes had been long deprived of a sepulchre worthy of her rank and of her eventful history. 
Katherine de Valois, the 'Kate' of Shakespeare, was born in 1101, married to Henry V. in 1420, crowned in the Abbey in 1421, gave birth to Henry VI. in 1422, then married Owen Tudor, and, after bearing him three children, died at Bermondsey Abbey on the 2nd or 3rd January, 1437-8, 'where,' says Sandford, 'she either took sanctuary, or for devotion repaired.' 
On the 8th of February 1438 her body was conveyed by water to the collegiate church of St. Katherine, near the Tower of London, of which foundation she as Queen Consort of England had been patroness. A funeral service was performed there, and she was then carried to St. Pal's Cathedral, where another service was held. The final funeral celebration was in Westminster Abbey, where, as the first royal interment in the Lady Chapel, she was probably buried in front of the altar. The prominent position of her tomb is indicated in the following passage in the deposition of John Ashby (1460-1) concerning the sepulchre of King Henry VI., when that King came to the Abbey to select his own burial-place. No suitable spot could be found in the chapel of St. Edward; and 'so he went in to our Lady Chapel of the same church, and there beheld the tomb of Queen Katherine, mother to the said King Henry the VI. And there it was spoken and devised by the said persons that the said tomb of Queen Katherine might be removed some deal lower, and to be more honourably apparelled than it was. And after that a tomb for the said King Henry the VI to be set down between his said mother's tomb and the altar of the same Our Lady Chapel.' No decision was then arrived at, and another suggestion was adopted for the tomb of Henry VI; and the tomb of his mother, dishonourably apparelled,' remained until in 1502 Henry VII pulled down the Lady Chapel in order to erect the present structure, when 'her body was taken up, and, the coffin being decayed, it was put in a wooden chest, and placed near her husband's tomb in the east end of the Friars (as Stowe calls it).' 
In Henry VIIth’s will, dated Canterbury, the 10th of April, the twenty-third year of his reign (1508),(Henry VII died 21 April, 1509) is the following reference to her interment: In our monastery at Westminster rests St. Edward, etc. etc. and diverse others of our noble progenitors and blood, and specially the body of our grand dame of right noble memory, Queen Katherine wife to King Henry the V, and daughter to King Charles of France, etc. our body therefore to be buried within the same monastery, that is to say, in the chapel where our said grand dame lay buried, the which chapel we have begun to build new in the honour of our blessed Lady.' 
In 1631 Weaver, in his Funeral Monuments, referring to Westminster Abbey, writes: Katherine, Queen of England, lies here, in a chest or coffin with a loose cover, to be seen and handled by any who will much desire it; and that by her own appointment (as he who shows the tombs will tell you by tradition), in regard of her disobedience to her husband for being delivered of her son, Henry VI, at Windsor, the place which he forbade. But the truth is that she being first buried in Our Ladies Chapel here, in this church, her corpse was taken up, when as Henry VII laid the foundation of that admirable structure, his chapel royal, which have ever since so remained, and never re-buried.' Sandford, writing in 1662, says, 'She remains still above ground in a coffin of boards, near the sepulchre of Henry V, her first husband, by her erected in the chapel of the Kings, the figure of which coffin is marked with the letter B in the 289th page of this book.' On reference to this engraving (by Gaywood) it will be observed that the coffin is lying on the south side of the King's tomb. 
The following characteristic entry in Pepys's Diary records what he saw upon the occasion of his visit to the Abbey: '23 February, 1668-9. To Westminster Abbey, and there did see all the tombs very finely, having one with us alone, there being other company this day to see the tombs, it being Shrove Tuesday. And here we did see, by particular favour, the body of Queen Katherine of Valois; and I had the upper part of her body in my hands, and I did kiss her mouth, reflecting upon it that I did kiss a Queen, and this was my birthday, thirty-six years old, that I did kiss a Queen. But here this man, who seems to understand well, tells me that that saying is not true that she was never buried, for she was buried; only, when Henry VII built his chapel, she was taken up and laid in this wooden coffin; but I did there see that in it the body was buried in a leaden one, which remains under the body to this day.' Fuller, in his Church History, book iv. thus alludes to the tradition of the cause of Queen Katherine having never been buried: 'Her body lies at this day unburied in a loose coffin at Westminster, lately showed to such as desire it, and there depends a story thereon. There was an old prophesy among the English (observed by foreigners to be the greatest prophesy-mongers, and whilst the Devil knows their diet they shall never want a dish to please the palate) that an English Prince, born at Windsor, should be unfortunate in losing what his father had acquired. Whereupon King Henry forbade Queen Katherine, big with child, to be delivered there, who out of the corrupt principle, 'Nitimur in vetitum,'{eagerly wanting what has been denied} and affecting her father before her husband, was there brought to the bed of King Henry VI, in whose reign the fair victories woven by his father's valour were by cowardice, carelessness, and contentions, unravelled to nothing. Report, the greatest (though not the truest) author, vouches that sensible of her fault in disobeying her husband it was her own desire and pleasure that her body should never be buried. If so, it is a pity that woman (especially a Queen) should have her will therein, whose dust does preach a sermon of duty to feminine, and of mortality to all, beholders. But this story is told otherwise by other authors, namely, that she was buried near her husband, King Henry V under a fair tomb, where she had a large epitaph, and continued in her grave some years, until King Henry VII, laying the foundation of a new chapel, caused her corpse to be taken up; but why her great-grandchild (Henry VIII) did not order it to be re-interred is not recorded. If done by casualty and neglect it is very strange, and stranger if deliberate.' 
In 1681 Keep writes, 'On the south side of this tomb (of Henry V) is a wooden chest or coffin, wherein part of the skeleton and parched body of Katherine Valois, from the waist upwards, is to be seen, of whom many fabulous stories are reported for her lying here; but the truth is that when Henry VII caused the old chapel of Our Lady (at the entrance whereof this Queen was interred Query entrance.' See Ashby's deposition, ante, p. 283.) to be pulled down, the workmen finding her coffin among others to be well-nigh perished and decayed, what remained of her body was taken then and placed in this capsule near her husband, where it has continued ever since, which is not frequently shown to any but as an especial favour by some of the chief officers of the church.' 
In 1711 Crull records, Depart of her skeleton is still to be seen in a wooden chest standing on the south side of her husband's monument.' Dart writes in 1723, 'Her body was taken up, and the coffin being decayed it was put in a wooden chest and placed near her husband's tomb at the east end of the Fryers, where it has ever since continued to be seen, the bones being firmly united and thinly clothed with flesh like scrapings of tanned leather, a view fit to represent to us the end of beauty, greatness, and what else sublunary things we boast.' 
Noorthouck, in his History of London, published in 1773, mentions 'That near the tomb of Henry V lie the remains of Katherine, his consort, in a wooden chest.' 
Gough, in his Sepulchral Monuments, states that when the Queen's body was taken up the coffin being decayed was put into a wooden chest and placed near her husband's tomb at the east end of the Fryers, where it continued ever since, the bones firmly united and the flesh and skin dried up like tanned leather. Of late years the Westminster scholars amused themselves with tearing it to pieces; and one in particular, who bore a principal character in the police of India, lies under the imputation of having contributed in an especial manner to that havoc. I can just remember seeing some shapeless mass of the mummy of a whitish colour. It is now under lock and key near her husband's tomb, waiting for the next opening of the royal vault for her last repose.' George II's vault was then the royal vault. 
So it lay till the time of Dean Thomas, when, according to Neale, in 1776, (the year of the death and funeral of the first Duchess of Northumberland, when the Percy vault was constructed in the chapel of St. Nicholas,) the opportunity was taken of placing the coffin of Queen Katherine out of sight in the adjacent vault of Sir George Villiers and his wife the Countess of Buckingham. There, from Neale's statement, it was believed to be, but, as the vault could only be reached through that of the Percies, no access could be had to the coffin of the Queen, and there was no absolute certainty as to the possibility of finding or verifying it. 
It was within a few days after the determination to take the first opportunity of inspecting this temporary place of sepulchre that the occasion was furnished by the death of Lord Henry Percy. In accordance with the long prescriptive right of that illustrious house, the funeral took place in the family vault in the chapel of St. Nicholas on the 7th of December, 1877. At the same time the permission of Her Majesty the Queen for the removal of the remains of her royal ancestress to the chantry of King Henry V was graciously accorded. 
In the evening after the funeral, the Percy vault was entered, the wall of separation was found, and, when pierced with a hole sufficient to illuminate the Villiers' vault, there was seen resting on the top of a pile of coffins on the south side the box or chest which Neale had stated to be deposited there, and the first syllable of Queen Katharine's name was legible upon a leaden plate; the hole was then closed up and the discovery was communicated to the Dean. 
Early on Saturday, the 8th of December, 1877, the Dean, Canon Farrar, and Mr. Doyne Bell, met in the chapel of St. Nicholas; the Percy vault was opened, and a portion of the wall of separation was removed, so as to allow a coffin to pass through the wall. This wall was found to be of the thickness of one brick, instead of three (as was shown on a plan of the Percy vault belonging to the Duke of Northumberland), so that the opening was made with great facility. Through this aperture there was visible the chest containing the remains of the Queen. It was lying on the south side, close to the south wall, and was immediately under the effigy of the Countess of Buckingham. The bare lead coffin on which it rested inclined over towards the south, and this subsidence had thrown the chest close up against the damp wall. This dampness was occasioned by the insufficient ventilation of the Villiers’ vault. The vaults in the Abbey are usually remarkable for their dryness and good construction. This contact had communicated so much moisture to the wooden chest that its substance was quite altered, and had become like a pulp of considerable softness, so that by its own weight it had broken into several pieces. The side which was away from the wall was less decayed, and maintained its form and substance; the edges of sheet-lead could be felt through the apertures of the wood. 
It was at first feared that this rottenness of the wood would prevent the possibility of the chest being removed in an entire condition, and at the first attempt to raise it there was a sound like the breaking up of the whole mass; this was however found to be caused by the adhesion to the lead coffin beneath, and on striking the wooden bottom it appeared tolerably hard and sound. The chest being thus loosened from its resting-place was then tilted up slightly and a broad plank was gradually slid underneath it; this afforded a good strong bottom; an upright plank was then screwed on to the side, and this gave strength sufficient to enable the chest to be removed. Two of the attendants were then able to move it gently and lift it along through the Percy vault, so that it could be raised and passed out on to the floor of the chapel above. This operation took some time, and required extreme caution, as the space was very limited, the openings were narrow, and it was necessary that the chest should be kept in a horizontal position in consequence of its rotten condition. Being thus safely raised in its cradle, it was placed upon a stand which had been previously prepared. The rotten pieces of wood were gradually and gently lifted off, together with the one large piece to which a leaden inscription plate was attached, and the remains of Queen Katherine were then exposed to view. Mr. Bell proceeded at once to make an examination of the contents of the coffin, and Mr. George Scharf, to whom the Dean had telegraphed, arrived very shortly afterwards. The coffin was a rectangular box of elm plank, 4 feet 6 inches in length and 1 foot 8 inches in width, and about 1 foot in depth. Upon the box was fastened with four screws a leaden plate, 12 inches square, upon which was the following inscription: -
Katherine Valois, 
Queen to King Henry V. 
1437. 
Deposited in this chapel 
of St. Nicholas by Benjamin Fidoe, 
Clerk of the Works 
of Westminster Abbey, 
1778. 
This differs from Neale, ii, 89, who gives the date 1776. 1778 is correct, as it is the date when the Percy vault was completed. 
Although great care had been used in lifting the box the lid had fallen into upwards of twenty fragments; and it was remarkable that, although when first seen lying in the Villiers’ vault it appeared even when touched to be tolerably firm and sound in parts, yet in an hour or two after it had been raised the action of the air seemed to produce a remarkable change in its substance, and it gradually fell to pieces. 
It had been made out of rough elm-plank, which had not even been planed, as the timber merchant's marks were remaining upon it, and the box itself was merely nailed together in the roughest manner; the lid had been fastened down with six iron screws. Most probably it was not even prepared to contain the remains of the Queen, and had been previously used for some other purpose, as it appeared to have had hinges on one side, and the strip of lead on which the remains lay had evidently been curled round (independently of the effect of corrosion) and cut in order to make it fit into the box. 
Very possibly when the Queen's remains were exhumed in 1502 her wooden coffin was found to have perished, but her body, being wrapped in thick cere-cloth, remained entire. A portion of the old lead from the roof of the Lady Chapel, which had been then just removed, was appropriated, after rough cutting, as a sheet on which to extend the body, which was then placed in a new chest by her husband's tomb, there to await its deposition in a more appropriate receptacle by some succeeding monarch. This strip of lead had never formed part of a complete in closure of lead; it is and has always been a flat sheet of lead; its edges are cut jaggedly and irregularly, and there is a seam which runs longitudinally down the middle of it. This soldered seam throughout the full length of the sheet, 7 1/2 feet in length, may have been an original seam in the old lead, or it may have been made by joining together two strips of the old lead. There, however, it remained until Benjamin Fidoe removed the first decaying and open chest, and then, by clumsy handling, shortened and distorted the body in order to place it in a chest measuring only 4 feet 6 inches in length. 
The upper part of the body, as might have been surmised from the accounts of Poppies, Crull, Dart, Gough, &c. already quoted, was found to have been very much disturbed, and several portions are missing. Not more than half of the skull and only a few ribs and vertebræ remain; two bones of the right arm are also missing, but the lower portion of the body was very perfect. The legs were lying in an undisturbed condition; they had been wrapped in probably as many as twelve folds of cere-cloth, which had retained them in the same position as when the Queen was first buried; the left arm and hand were also quite perfect. Upon these limbs the skin and the muscles beneath were visible, and the latter became more defined as the moisture which had penetrated the chest became absorbed by exposure to the air. The leg-bones measured: femur, 1 foot 4 inches; tibia, 1 foot 2 inches; from which it may be concluded that the Queen was about 5 feet 6 inches to 5 feet 7 inches in height - a tall woman; she had also long arms. The form of the foot and ankle, which were small, seemed extremely graceful. The left kneecap had fallen out of its place, but it is believed that this was only during the removal from the Percy vault. 
The remains of the upper part of the body were few, and were found in a very irregular position. The skull was lying on the pelvis; the two scapulæ were identified, but only one rib-bone was to be found. An irregular mass, covered with dried skin, containing all the vertebræ of the neck, lay below the skull. The skull itself appeared to have suffered much injury, and had also been somewhat crushed by the corroded lead which had curled over upon it; it is small and well-formed; the lower and also the upper jaw were missing. The skull and some other bones showed signs of much corrosion, and bore evidence that lime had been thrown upon them; lime was also observed upon some fragments of skin and flesh. 
At the upper end of the sheet of lead there was a thick cushion, upon which the head had originally rested. This was partly enveloped in the cere-cloth, and was formed of some coarse woollen-woven material, and had been covered with silk, some fragments of which still remained upon it (the only piece of any size that could be lifted up was taken out and presented to her Majesty the Queen). 
The clerk of the works had prepared some additional planking, which could be screwed on to the 'cradle' without shaking it, thus forming a complete box. As soon as Mr. George Scharf had made some drawings of the remains this box was closed up, and at half-past 4 o'clock it was transferred to the chantry chapel of King Henry V. 
Mr. Doyne Bell writes: 'It was a striking and impressive scene, which I shall ever remember, and which at the time it was impossible to view without some feeling of emotion. The daylight had quite faded, and we were alone in the darkened Abbey. Two workmen took up the box containing the Queen's remains, and followed Mr. Poole and the clerk of the works; the latter, carrying in his hand one small lantern to light us, led the way out of St. Nicholas chapel to the north side of the chantry chapel. Mr. George Scharf and myself followed, no one else was present, and we seemed unconsciously and silently to fall into a sort of processional order. I remarked to him 'We are attending the Queen's third funeral.' Not a word was said as we passed slowly round the ambulatory in the darkness. My mind reverted to those gorgeous ceremonials in which during her lifetime this Queen had taken part within these same walls. Her own coronation by Archbishop Chichele; the splendid funeral services celebrated over the body of her warrior husband; the coronation of her youthful son; and lastly her own funeral in the Lady Chapel. These I contrasted with the subsequent neglect and ill-treatment of her remains, until in 1778, when they had doubtless with little or no ceremony been placed in the vault where we had just found them. The absence of the names of any of the higher officials of the Abbey on the leaden coffin-plate seems to indicate that Benjamin Fidoe, the clerk of the works, undertook the removal without any of them being present. We then passed up the turret-stair into the chantry, when the box was slung up and laid in front of the altar-table.' 
A new chest to receive the Queen's remains was now prepared. It is of English oak, one inch thick, the angles dovetailed, the top and bottom rebated to take the sides and ends; it is finely wrought and carefully finished. One side was left free, and this was taken out, so that on the 18th of December the leaden tray was slid into it without shaking a fragment of the remains which rested on it; the side was then fixed and screwed on firmly. Upon the lid was fastened the lead plate of Benjamin Fidoe, and a new plate was also attached to it, bearing the following inscription: The former chest, which for 99 years had decayed in the Villiers’ vault in the chapel of St. Nicholas, was removed thence, and this new chest including the Royal remains, was, with the sanction of Queen Victoria, placed here in this chantry of King Henry V. by Thomas Wright, clerk of works at Westminster Abbey, in the presence of Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, D.D., Dean of Westminster, A.D. 1878.' 
The altar-slab had been raised from the floor of the chantry, and placed in position against the wall. In order to arrange for its permanent fixing, and to complete the form of the altar-tomb, Sir Gilbert Scott suggested that the sides should be formed of three slabs of grey marble, the surface being smoothed but not polished, so that it should, when completed, somewhat resemble the tomb of King Edward I. 

In order to place the chest completely under the altar-table it was necessary to withdraw a stone from the cast wall, so as to form a recess, twelve inches in depth; this stone was then transferred to the front, and placed so as to serve for a support to the head of the chest, thus making the best possible use of it. A slab of slate was then inserted, the one end resting in the east wall and the other in a notch cut in this stone. Upon this slab were placed four small squares of marble, one inch in thickness, in order to prevent the contact of the entire surfaces of the wooden chest with the slate slab, and to allow for a free passage of air between them. 
The three slabs of grey marble for the sides and front of the altar-tomb, which had been previously prepared, were brought into position. On the front slab was incised the following inscription
Under this picture 
(Once this chapel's altar) 
for a long time fragmented by fire, 
Resting at last, 
After various changes, 
On the orders of Queen Victoria deposited 
the bones of Catherine Valois 
Daughter of Charles VI, King of France; 
The wife of Henry V, 
Mother of Henry VI 
Grandmother of Henry VII. 
Born 1400. Crowned 1421. Died Under this picture 
At the four corners of the front slab were carved within trefoils,-1, The arms of England; 2, The flaming cresset of Henry V.; 3, The white hart of Richard II.; 4, The swan crowned and chained of Henry IV.,--these three badges being repeated from those which are upon the cornice above the altar. A diaper pattern formed of the fleur-de-lys, and a cross within a lozenge, which is copied from the maniple on the brass effigy of John of Waltham, bishop of Salisbury, formed a border to the slab. 
All was in readiness when, on the 29th of January, 1878, as recorded in the following memorandum in the Abbey records, the chest was raised to its resting. place under the altar-tomb:
The coffin was placed in the niche prepared for it by the clerk of the works and the master mason, in the presence of the dean, the chapter clerk, and Mr. Doyne Bell, at noon this morning, and the front altar-slab was finally closed over it in the presence of the dean at four o'clock this afternoon.' 
The choice of this resting-place for Queen Katherine is, it is believed, in accordance with the requirement of the peculiar circumstances of the case. 
The continuance of the remains in an obscure vault, unknown, unrecorded even in the register of the Abbey, was evidently unsuitable. If removed thence they might perhaps have been placed either in the royal vault of George II or in the vacant space beside her husband. But the Georgian vault is so exclusively devoted to the princes of a later dynasty that there would have been an inconvenience in the intrusion of the French princess; and in the changed conditions of the Abbey the space by Henry V's tomb, where the body was formerly exposed, has become necessary for the thoroughfare of the vast crowds of visitors. There seemed, moreover, to be an incongruity in the creation at this late period of a new royal monument for one who departed four centuries ago. The spot where her remains now repose is beneath a venerable monument of ancient days, recently rescued from oblivion, and which else would have had no present use. Its selection is justified by the analogy of the burial of King Edward VI beneath the ancient altar of Henry VII's chapel, and of his sister Queen Mary under the broken altars of the surrounding chapel. Queen Katherine rests in the chapel erected, if not by herself, at least under her auspices, to her husband's memory, and over the tomb to which she herself supplied the now mutilated effigy. Over her, tower on one side the trophies of the victory by which King Henry won her for his wife; on the other side, the images which belong to the devotional feeling peculiar to his time; in the centre, the group of the Enunciation, which gives the altar its name, flanked by the ancient Kings, probably Edward the Confessor, founder of the Abbey, and of Arthur, who by Henry V, and in his time, was brought forward as the ideal and typical King of Britain; and on the two extremities St. George the patron saint of England, and St. Denys the patron saint of her native country, the outward and visible sign that her husband was the first sovereign of England who was also King of France. Here she rests in the midst of the royal sepulchres; yet, in conformity with the obscurity into which she fell, withdrawn from them, after vicissitudes in death equal to her vicissitudes in life, midway between the older Plantagenets and the later Tudors,--the missing link which unites the earlier and the later history of England together. Wife of the fifth Henry, conqueror of Agincourt; mother by him of the unfortunate sixth Henry, who inherited from her it may be her own father's insanity; grandmother, by her Welsh husband, of the seventh Henry, by whose extraordinary family the English Church and nation were established on their present basis, and from whose children the present reigning family derives its hereditary right to the English Crown. 
It is the latest royal tomb in the Abbey, and, though long delayed, it has been thought that the singular and romantic history of a French Princess and an English Queen should at length be brought to an honourable end. Rest in Peace. 
APPENDIX. 
Report by George Scharf, Esq., F.S.A., Keeper and Secretary to the National Portrait Gallery, upon first seeing the Remains. 
The recently discovered remains of Queen Katherine of Valois have suffered extensively from damp, and are still quite moist and fragile. The exposed bones break under the slightest touch like wet sand that has caked. The muscles attached to the arms and legs are porous; but remain tough, and have a spongy elasticity. 
The upper and lower limbs, owing to the removal of the vertebral column, and nearly all the ribs, have been brought side by side on the same level. 
The bladebones and collar-bones (only one of the latter visible) have been mixed up with the pelvis, and the left hand reaches to below the knees. 
The front part of the skull appears to have crumbled entirely away, but the back part still rests on a silken cushion of rough texture. The styloid processes of the skull are singularly perfect, and quite hard to the touch. 
Several rings of cartilage may be detected among the debris of wood, bone, and cere-cloth, which fill the bottom of the leaden receptacle. 
GEORGE SCHARF, 
Keeper and Secretary to the National Portrait Gallery. 
10th December, 1877. 
It may be added, that, on again seeing these remains after the lapse of many days, I found their condition very much changed, owing in a great degree to the dry atmosphere to which they had been removed. The general colour had completely altered, the forms appeared more sharply defined, and the texture of the bones perfectly hardened. 
Report by CHARLES SONGSTER, Esq., M.R.C.S. 
The bones, as I saw them, were lying on a sheet of lead, and enclosed in a wooden box. 
The skull was lying on the left side, and the parts nearest the pillow or cushion had escaped the action of lime. 
The right parietal, temporal, and right half of frontal bones, were entirely destroyed by lime (leaving a large hole), and the bone, to the extent of an inch all round this opening, was in a crumbling condition, and gave way easily to the touch. 
The features were scarcely discernible. The upper and lower jaws, nasal and (molar) bones, were absent; in fact, all the bones of the face were wanting. The rest of the skull was in good preservation, even the styloid processes being present, the left measuring an inch and a half; the right was broken. Immediately below the skull were the seven cervical and first dorsal vertebræ, all in position (the atlas and axis being perfect, but detached from the skull); then came first rib, and the upper piece of sternum or breast-bone. All the other ribs were missing. 
On the left of the skull was seen the left innominate bone (of the pelvis) in a good condition, wanting only the (raucus) of ischium and pubes, and lying on this bone was the upper half of left scapula (or ramus blade-bone), also the left humerus (or arm-bone) turned round with the elbow socket in front; the radius and ulna (or fore-arm) were perfect and in position, also presenting the back view; the carpus and metacarpus were perfect; the phalanges (or fingers) were absent. The left femur (or thighbone) was seen lying by the side and internal to the humerus, the head of the bone being just external to the acetabulum of the innominate bone (or close to its original socket). This bone was perfect both in shape and position. 
Tibia and fibula (or leg-bones) were attached to the lower end of the femur, lying in their original position. The foot was quite perfect, with the toes turned outwards, and entangled somewhat in cere-cloth. 
The muscles of the calf were still attached to the bones, and assumed the form of dried strips of leather. The tendons passing under the inner ankle to the sole of the foot were quite perfect. 
The left patella (or kneecap) was lying just below the knee-joint on the outer side. 
On the right of the skull was seen the right femur, the shaft of which was considerably destroyed by lime. Immediately internal to the femur was the right humerus, showing the back view, and internal to that was the right scapula, very perfect, and on the scapula was lying the right clavicle. 
Below the humerus was the upper third of right ulna; the remainder of forearm and hand were missing. Tibia and fibula were in situ, and, like the left, had remnants of muscles attached to them. 
The foot was disjointed, and the toes had all fallen apart. 
Amongst the remains, not a single tooth was found. 
Measurements of Long Bones. 
Humerus, 1 foot 1/2 inch; radius, 8 3/4 inches; ulna, 9 1/4 inches; femur, 1 foot 4 inches; tibia, 1 foot 2 inches. 
Bones Missing. 
Both superior and inferior maxillæ, 
Right parietal and temporal bones. 
Right half of frontal bone. 
Both nasal and molar bones. 
Left clavicle. 
Sternum except the upper piece. 
All the ribs except the first. 
Lower half of left scapula. 
Right radius and half of una. 
Right carpus and metacarpus. 
Eleven dorsal and all lumbar vertebræ. 
Right innominate bone. 
Sacrum and coccyx. 
Right patella. 
CHAS. SONGSTER, M.R.C.S., &c.  [30th January, 1878.]
