
Disinterment of Kings.

The following very interesting extract is from the last North American Review. We sometimes hear of the disinterment of dead bodies, which after having been entombed for many years, have presented relics in a remarkable degree of preservation. Such accounts are for the most part vague, and we know not what credit to award them. The following cases are exceedingly interesting, in consequence of the antiquity and historical relations of the subjects, and still more because the statements may be relied on as strictly authentic.

One of the most interesting accounts of the preservation of a body, the identity of which was undoubted, is that of the disinterment of King Edward I, of England. The readers of English history will recollect that this monarch gave as a dying charge to his son, that his heart should be sent to the Holy Land, but that his body should be carried in the van of the army, till Scotland was reduced to obedience.

He died in July 1307, and notwithstanding his injunctions, he was buried in Westminster Abbey in October of the same year. It is recorded, that he was embalmed, and orders for renewing the cerecloth about his body were issued in the reigns of Edward III and Henry IV. The tomb of this monarch was opened, and his body examined in January 1774, under the direction of Sir Joseph Aloffe, after it had been buried 467 years. The following extract is from a contemporaneous volume of the Gentleman's Magazine.

'Some gentlemen of the Society of Antiquaries being desirous of seeing how far the actual state of Edward E's body answered to the methods taken to preserve it, obtained leave to open the large stone sarcophagus, in which it is known to have been deposited, on the north side of Edward the Confessor's chapel.
This was accordingly done on the morning of 2 January 1774; when in a coffin of yellow stone, they found the royal body in perfect preservation, enclosed in two wrappers; one of them was of gold tissue, strongly waxed and fresh; the other and outermost considerably decayed. The corpse was habited in a rich mantle of purple, lined with white, and adorned with ornaments of gilt metal, studded with red and blue stones and pearls. Two similar ornaments lay on the hands. The mantle was fastened on the right shoulder by a magnificent fibula of the same metal, with the same stones and pearls. His face had over it a silken covering, so fine, and so closely fitted to it, as to preserve the features entire. Round his temples was a gilt coronet of fleure de lys. In his hands, which were also entire, were two sceptres of gilt metal; that in the right surmounted by a cross floury that in the left by three clusters of oak leaves and a dove on a globe; this sceptre was about five feet long. The feet were enveloped in the mantle and other coverings, but sound, and the toes distinct. The whole length of the corpse was five ft two ins.'

This last statement, it will be observed, is the only point in which the narrative appears to disagree with history. We are generally given to understand that Edward I was a tall man; and that he was designated in his own time by the name of Longshanks. Baker, in his Chronicle of the Kings of England, says of him, that he was tall of stature, exceeding most of other men by a head and shoulders. We have not been able to find Sir Joseph Ayloff's account of the examination, and know of no other mode of reconciling the discrepancy, but by supposing a typographical error of a figure in the account which has been quoted.

Edward I died at Burgh-by-Sands in Cumberland, on his way to Scotland, 7 July 1307, in the sixty-eighth year of his age.'

Another instance of partial preservation is that of the body of King Charles I, the subject of the work at the head of this article. The remains of this unfortunate monarch are known to have been carried to Windsor, and there interred by his friends, without pomp, in a hasty and private manner. It is stated in Clarendon's History of the Rebellion, that when his son, Charles II, was desirous to remove and re-inter his corpse at Westminster Abbey, it could not by any search be found. In constructing a Mausoleum at Windsor in 1813, under the direction of George IV, then Prince Regent, an accident led to the discovery of this royal body. The workmen, informing a subterraneous passage under the choir of St George's chapel, accidentally made an aperture in the wall of the vault of King Henry VIII. On looking through this opening, it was found to contain three coffins, instead of two, as had been supposed. Two of these were ascertained to be the coffins of Henry VIII and one of his queens, Jane Seymour. The other was formally examined, after permission obtained, by Sir Henry Halford, in presence of several members of the royal family and other persons of distinction. The account since published by Sir Henry, corroborates the one which had been given by Mr Herbert, a groom of King Charles's bedchamber, and is published in Wood's Athenae Oxonienses.

On removing the pall, says the account, a plain leaden coffin presented itself to view with no appearance of ever having been enclosed in wood, and bearing an inscription, 'King Charles, 1648,' in large legible characters on a scroll of lead encircling it. A square opening was then made in the upper part of the lid, of such dimensions as to admit a clear insight into its contents. These were an internal wooden coffin, very much decayed, and the body carefully wrapped up in cerecloth, into the folds of which a quantity of unctious matter, mixed with rosin, as it seemed, had been melted, so as to exclude, as effectually as possible, the external air. The coffin was completely full, and from the tenacity of the cerecloth, great difficulty was experienced in detaching it successfully from the parts which it enveloped. Wherever the unctuous matter had insinuated itself, the separation of the cerecloth was easy; and where it came off, a correct impression of the features to which it had been applied, was observed. At length the whole face was disengaged from its covering. The complexion of the skin of it was dark and discoloured. The forehead and temples had lost little or nothing of their muscular substance; the cartilage of the nose was gone; but the left eye in the first moment of exposure, was open and full, though it vanished almost immediately; and the pointed beard, so characteristic of the period of the reign of King Charles, was perfect. The shape of the face was a long oval; many of the teeth remained, and the left ear, in consequence of the interposition of the unctuous matter between it and the cerecloth, was found entire.

It was difficult at this moment, to withhold a declaration that, notwithstanding the disfigurement, the countenance did bear a strong resemblance to the coins, the busts, and especially to the picture of King Charles I by Vandyke, by which it had been made familiar to us. It is true, that the minds of the spectators of this interesting sight were well prepared to receive this impression; but it is also certain, that such a facility of belief has been occasioned by the simplicity and truth of Mr Herbert's narrative - every part of which has been confirmed by the investigation, so far as it had advanced; and it will not be denied that the shape of the face, the forehead, the eye, and the beard, and the most important features by which resemblance is determined.

When the head had been entirely disengaged from the attachments which confined it, it was found to be loose, and without any difficulty was taken out and held up to view. The back part of the scalp was entirely perfect, and had a remarkably fresh appearance; the pores of the skin, being more distinct, and the tendons and ligaments of the neck were of considerable substance and firmness. The hair was thick at the back part of the head, and, in appearance, nearly black. A portion of it, which has since been cleaned and dried, is of a beautiful dark brown colour. That of the beard was a redder brown. On the back part of his head it was not more than one inch in length, and had probably been cut so short for the convenience of the executioner, or perhaps by the piety of his friends soon after death, in order to furnish memorials of the unhappy king.

On holding up the head, to examine the place of separation from the body, the muscles of the neck had evidently retracted themselves considerably; and the fourth cervical vertebra, was found to be cut through its substance transversely, leaving the surfaces of the divided portions perfectly smooth and even,
an appearance which could have been produced only by a heavy blow, inflicted with a very sharp instrument, and which furnished the last proof wanting to identify a King Charles I.

The foregoing are two of the most successful instances of posthumous preservation. The care taken in regard to some other distinguished personages has been less fortunate in its result. The coffin of Henry VIII was inspected at the same time with that of Charles, and was found to contain nothing but the mere skeleton of the king. Some portions of the beard remained on the chin, but there was nothing to discriminate the personage contained in it.

During the present century, the sarcophagus of King John has also been examined. It contained little else than a disorganised mass of earth. The principle substances found, were some half decayed bones, a few vestiges of cloth and leather, and a long rusty piece of iron, apparently the remains of the sword blade of that monarch.



